--- START CONTENT: EuRoC_22_Post_flight_report_compressed.pdf ---
Darwin III: Lessons Learned
Team 11 Post-Flight Analysis for the 2022 EuRoC
17 October 2022
1 — Press Release
Saturday 15th of October, 2022, the Darwin III launch vehicle, which was conceptualised, designed and
manufactured by the endeavour student group based in Edinburgh, took off on its flight to 9000 meters
from the Santa Margarida Army Base in Portugal during the European Rocketry Challenge launch campaign.
The launch vehicle was carrying a payload featuring two scientifically significant experiments, which were
recognised by the European Space Agency Payload Award as the best out of the over 20 experiments presented
by the teams competing in the competition.
Figure 1.1: Computer Aided Design (CAD) model of the Darwin III Launch Vehicle with Fin-Can Detail.
Figure 1.2: Wholly student-designed CNC Machined Bulkheads and Structural rods which support the Carbon
Fiber airframe. Machined at the University of Edinburgh Mechanical Engineering Machine Shop in Sanderson
Building.
1
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
Figure 1.3: Three of the over 10 student designed and assembled Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) comprising
the Avionics Stack responisble for datalogging, guidance and telemetry tasks
Figure 1.4: Images of the Team taken at the Unveiling Event held at the Informatics Forum in the University
of Edinburgh Central Area Campus.
The launch team is composed by the following students from the Schools of Engineering, Informatics and
Physics from the University of Edinburgh.
Name Role
Alberto Progida Flight Director (FIDO)
Zsolt Csonka Integration Lead
Thomas Stott SRAD Avionics Deputy
Ann Lee Logistics Lead
Daniel Holler Software Lead
Alex Stevenson Recovery Lead
Jo Shepton Payload Principal Investigator (PI)
Virginia Cangelosi Payload Electrical Lead
Matus Komjaty Ground Station Operator (GSO1)
Joseph Azrak Ground Station Operator (GSO2)
Jasper Day Structures Deputy
Phil Heinrich Payload Software Deputy
Fergus Wilson Payload Mechanical Deputy
2
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
The Payload
The experiments are a student built muon detector (a modified version of MIT’s CosmicWatch Muon Detec-
tor, adapted and ruggedized to survive the harsh launch environement) and a fluid dynamics slosh experiment.
The mission aims the payload were as follows:
1. Collect muon count data using our modified CosmicWatch muon detector during flight to explore how
muon detection rate changes with altitude, along with correlating it to temperature and pressure data
the payload collects independently
2. Compare the muon rate during flight to the rate at sea level to explore Einstein’s theory of special
relativity and the efficiency of the detector
3. Using a wide-angle lens camera, observe how propylene glycol (a fluid with a higher viscosity than water)
behaves during flight and how this relates to the wave fluid dynamics, with focus on the potential points
of micro-gravity.
4. Using the IMU acceleration data, attempt to reproduce the recorded fluid behaviour in a Computational
Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation.
Both of these experiments have been researched extensively and characterised during a Summer Internship
conducted in collaboration with the School of Physics focusing on testing the limits of the muon detector.
Figure 1.5: A fully integrated test of the Avionics and Payload, while streaming video data to a host PC
(left). The payload being fully integrated with the airframe at the Launch Site Integration Tent
The Launch
Powered by a Cesaroni Technologies Inc. (CTI) O3400 solid rocket motor, the 34.334kg vehicle took off
the pad, performing a nominal 6.2 second burn. The structure, manufactured by students at the University
facilities out of high performance Carbon Fiber Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) composites and high-strength
7075-T6 Aluminium alloy withstood the 500kg thrust load imparted by the motor, cutting through the dense
atmosphere while accelerating at 150m/s2. Ignition had been attempted with the manufacturer-provided
igniter the previous day, 14/10/22 at 17:10 GMT, but had failed due to the humidity at the launchsite. A
more energetic igniter was installed on launch day, and the propulsive reaction began successfully at 12:00:28
GMT.
Takeoff was detected by the Student Researched and Developed (SRAD) Avionics stack, but telemetry was
lost prematurely due to the high interference environment and high speed. The team’s Ground Station
Operators (GSO2) maintained contact with the Commercial Off-The-Shelf tracking beacon throughout the
launch preparation procedures and the initial phases of flight. Tracking was temporarily lost at motor burnout
due to the high altitude and velocities, making it challenging to manually point the High Gain antennas at
3
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
Figure 1.6: Final assembly of the 4 Main Segments in the Integration Tent
Figure 1.7: The journey of Darwin III from the Integration Tent to the Launch Pad
the vehicle.
Figure 1.8: Liftoff and the long boosting phase captured by the official ESA photographer. The plume
consists mostly of water vapour and some CO2. The Team is currently developing a ”green” bi-liquid engine
with 95% combustion efficiency and a significantly cleaner exhaust
20 seconds into the flight, one of the two GSO’s briefly regained contact with COTS transceiver, confirming
the avionics had survived the expected initial 15G (150m/s2) acceleration. Both Mission Control and the
Spectator Area report a sonic boom seconds early in the boost phase, which is consistent with the trajectory
simulations carried out by the Team. GPS coordinates were not received due to the vehicle’s supersonic
4
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
speed, which deactivated in accordance with the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls
(CoCoM) regulations on GPS-equipped airborne objects. Following a chirp confirming the avionics health,
contact was lost again and no further telemetry was received by the Endeavour Mission Control. EuRoC
Mission Control maintained more precise tracking and managed to receive a single GPS coordinate once
the vehicle had exited the supersonic regime, confirming the vehicle had crossed the point of maximum
aerodynamic pressure (MAX-Q) without losing structural integrity. The vehicle ascended remarkably straight
- a testament to the stiffness of the team’s structure and the accuracy of the fin construction.
Figure 1.9: The Misison Control team (left) and the Setup of the Ground Stations (right)
Further attempts to re-establish a telemetry link failed as the vehicle disappeared into the high-altitude haze
slowly shedding velocity. No data is available from here-on, and events are based on educated estimations
informed by the flight characteristics and trajectory simulations executed ahead of flight.
Visual confirmation of drogue or main parachute ejection was not given, and the vehicle was assumed
ballistic. No damage to life, limb or property was recorded and no fires were reported. Two recovery teams
were dispatched immediately after the closing of the launch window to the last GPS coordinates received,
which were necessarily in close proximity to the launch site due the early flight-stage in which they were
received. The recovery crews were not immediately succesful but were later directed towards a point at
39.386377N, -8.275252W by a local fire brigade, where Darwin III was immediately identified in a ”lawn
dart” position in the shade of some large trees.
Figure 1.10: The Landing Site of DIII and images from the Team Debriefing
The vehicle failed to deploy its nosecone at apogee, thus entering a high velocity dive quickly reaching its
terminal velocity of 251m/s. Darwin continued its descent following a ballistic trajectory, finally impacting
the ground and penetrating approximately 600mm into the Portuguese soil, a dry mixture of gravel, sand
and mid-sized sharp rocks, releasing 724’000 joules of energy in 8 thousands of a second.
80% of the vehicle disintegrated on impact, with failure modes ranging from brittle explosion, to plastic
5
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
deformation, composite delamination and buckling. The aft end of the lower body, including the fins and the
thrust structure, was recovered nearly intact, except for evidence of violent impact on the fins most likely
attributable to the forest canopy. There is little evidence of delamination caused by aero-thermal heating, and
few fatigue cracks imputable to fin flutter. Every system of the vehicle has been recovered and catalogued,
but the vehicle is cannot be reflown in its current state.
Figure 1.11: The Remains of Darwin III, exhibited to theJury for the Post-Flight Review. The root cause
identified by the Team and confirmed as highly likely by the Technical Experts.
Overall 4 out of the 6 goals set by the team were achieved, making the mission a partial success despite the off-
nominal recovery phase. On the technical side, the team was able to validate several manufacturing techniques
and prove the robustness of the structure through the most aggressive flight stages - notably the fins,
nosecone and interstages. The student-developed avionics performed nominally, but the deployment on the
field highlighted some areas for improvement, namely transmission power. Despite the data from the payload
not being recoverable, its scientific basis was recognised by the European Space Agency, building confidence
in the team’s rigorous processes in areas outside of manufacturing and engineering and strengthening ties to
the UoE School of Physics. On the operational side, massive leaps in organisation and integration between
subsystems was achieved, yielding a vehicle which could be assembled in under 30 minutes in the inhospitable
desert environment. The focus on health and safety, checklists and procedures resulted in an overall reliable
and predictable vehicle to operate and launch.
The team is extremely grateful to the stakeholders who have made all of this possible: our primary academic
partner (Schools of Engineering, Physics, Chemistry and Informatics at the University of Edinburgh), our
main industrial partners (MCarbo, supplier of CFRP airframe; ZOT, supplier of Printed Circuit Boards;
Dassault Systemes, Altium and nTopology, suppliers of professional-grade software), our sponsors (Skyrora,
Edinburgh Innovations, Data Driven Innovation and EasyComposites). Finally, a heartfelt ”obrigado” goes to
the incredibly welcoming and flexible team of EuRoC for providing the regulatory, organisational and logistical
support that enables the launch of such high-performance vehicles.
6
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
Figure 1.12: An imaage of the Launch Team following the Awards’ Ceremony
Figure 1.13: The Logos of our generous sponsors and industrial partners.
The Post-Flight Analysis
The Motor Casing plastically deformed on impact, splaying outwards and tearing open, with the Forward
Closure becoming one with the Motor Bulkhead and the Motor Retention Hardware. The Motor Tube
features evidence of extreme delamination following the winding angle pattern.
The 8mm thick Stainless Steel Force Rods supporting the Avionics Bay were found contorted upon them-
selves, having ripped their housing blocks from the Motor and Recovery Bulkheads respectively. This is
evidence of the immense shear loading experienced on impact, sufficient to shear off over 3cm2 of 7075-T6
Aluminium.
The Avionics was flattened amongst the bulkheads and most Surface Mounted Devices (SMD) such as
passive components and power regulators were ripped off the boards by the force of impact. The team
is happy to report that a FLASH chip was salveaged from the COTS Quantum Flight Computer in good
conditions. Data recovery attempts will be made in a controlled laboratory environment upon the return to
Edinburgh.
The Recovery system components were in a range of condutions. The compliant parachutes only present
some small perforations, while the recovery hardware such as the SRAD mechanism and the COTS Tender
7
Team 11 Post-Flight Report - EuRoC ’22
Descenders and Raptor systems were severaly damaged.
The Payload was flattened between its two heavy bulkheads, with the avionics encapsulated within the steel
and aluminium sheets. No data storage devices were salvaged, with all 3 SD cards haveing been found in
a fractured state. The Payload and the Nosecone and Nosecone Tip were found at the bottom of the hole
created by the vehicle, suggesting lack of separation at Apogee.
8

--- END CONTENT: EuRoC_22_Post_flight_report_compressed.pdf ---
--- START CONTENT: EuRoC_technical_report___Darwin_II_compressed.pdf ---
The University of Edinburgh
Student Rocketry Team
Darwin II: The Supersonic Endeavour
Team 9 Project Technical Report to the 2021 EuRoC
September 5, 2021
Abstract
The aim of this technical report is to describe the design, validation, optimization, and key
system implementation of Darwin II (DII) from endeavour. DII will mark the ﬁrst
participation of the team in EuRoC and the ﬁrst ever supersonic rocket made by the team.
The rocket features innovative technologies which will help develop a solid platform to base
our next rockets. Some of the key systems are: a carbon composite fuselage, active air brake
recovery, modular avionics bay fuselage, and a deployable payload. This report introduces the
structure of endeavour and Darwin project and outlines the main stakeholders. Then, the
diﬀerent system architectures are discussed, focusing on the propulsion, structure, recovery
system, payload and airbrake. Each section describes the systems in more detail and
highlights key features. Afterwards, a holistic view of the mission is given. Major milestones,
improvements, and lessons learnt are discussed in conclusion.
i
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank The University of Edinburgh for their support. Their ﬁnancial support
enabled team activities, the mechanical lab manufactured vital components for Darwin II, and
the advise of the staﬀ members were very helpful in improving our design. We would like
to speciﬁcally mention Dr. Francisca Martinez Hergueta, Dr. David Garcia Cava, Dr. Jeﬀ
Steynor, Kristina Tamane, the G.20 staﬀ, the Student Led Initiatives Support committee, and
Iain Gold for their advice and support for the team.
While not a part of the team, we would like to acknowledge and thank Liam Foley and Gustav
Ramner for their hard work on the MEng project that we have referenced in this report. Their
work has played a key role in design of Darwin II.
We are also very grateful for our sponsors; Cirrus Logic, RS Grass Roots, nTopology, Ansys,
Dassault Systèmes, M-Carbo, The Institute for Research in Schools (IRIS), and playerdata for
their support. Whether it was an in-kind or ﬁnancial support, they have enabled us to design,
simulate, and manufacture Darwin II. In particular, Charles Simpson from Alternum gave us
unique insights and advice as an experienced rocketeer and helped us improve our design.
We would like to thank Portugal Space, Município de Ponte de Sor, and the wonderful team
at EuRoC for hosting and organising this competition. It is an exciting event that gives us a
chance to launch Darwin II and meet other rocketeers. We can’t wait to be in Portugal!
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we would like to thank our members for their dedication
throughout the years. This rocket and the team wouldn’t have happened without them.
ii
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 System Architecture 4
2.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.2 Propulsion Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.3 Aerostructure Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3.1 External . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3.2 Internal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3.3 Numerical Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.4 Recovery Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4.2 Components and Speciﬁcations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
2.4.3 Recovery Subsystem Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2.4.4 Recovery Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
2.4.5 Recovery sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.5 Payload Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.6 Active Flight Control Subsystem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3 Mission Concept of Operations Overview 37
4 Conclusions and Outlook 40
A System Data 41
B Detailed Test Reports 43
B.1 Recovery testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
B.2 SRAD propulsion system testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
B.3 SRAD pressure system testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
B.4 SRAD Flight computer testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
B.4.1 GPS Module Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
B.4.2 Battery Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
B.4.3 Barometer and Temperature Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
B.4.4 IMU Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
B.4.5 RF Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
B.4.6 Output Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
B.4.7 Miscellaneous Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
B.4.8 Future Tests: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
C Hazard Analysis Report 51
D Risk Assessment 52
E Checklists & Procedures 53
E.1 Shipment & Edinburgh departure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
E.2 Pre-launch assembly checklist & procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
E.2.1 Lower section . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
E.2.2 Airbrake . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
iii
E.2.3 Avionics bay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
E.2.4 Recovery section - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST & PROCEDURE . . . 56
E.2.5 Nose cone - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
E.2.6 Entire vehicle without motor - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST . . . . . . . 59
E.3 Launch day . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
E.3.1 Motor installation Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
E.3.2 Launch checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
E.3.3 motor mishap disassembly PROCEDURE & CHECKLIST . . . . . . . . 62
E.3.4 motor disassembly after recovery PROCEDURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
F Engineering Drawings 63
G Subsystem Details 81
G.1 Payload Mass Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
H Detailed Structural and Mechanical Calculation 83
I Detailed Software Architecture 84
J Detailed Electrical Architecture 86
J.1 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Bibliography 41
iv
List of Abbreviations
BP - Black Powder
CFD - Computational ﬂuid dynamics
CFRP - Carbon ﬁbre reinforced polymer
CNC - Computer numerical control
COTS - Commercial oﬀ the shelf
DoF - Degrees of freedom
EMC - Environmental Monitoring Cluster
FC - Flight computer
FEA - Finite element analysis
FoS - Factor of safety
GFRP - Glass ﬁbre reinforced polymer
GPS - Global positioning system
HDPE - High-density polyethylene
LOS - Line of sight
PCB - Printed circuit boards
RF - Radio frequency
RFC - Recovery ﬂight computer
SARA - Scottish Aeronautics and Rocketry Association
SHSS - Shoulder Head Socket Screw
SRAD - Student research and developed
STEM - Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
TD - Tender descender
v
UKRA - United Kingdom Rocketry Association
Nomenclature
 Density [kg/m3]
 Stress [Pa]
a Acceleration [m/s2]
CD Drag coeﬃcient [-]
F Force [N]
g Gravitational acceleration [m/s2]
m Mass [kg]
P Pressure [Pa]
R Combustion Gas Constant [ft lbf/lbmR]
r Parachute area [m2]
r Parachute radius [m]
T Combustion gas temperature [R]
v Velocity [m/s]
vi
1. Introduction
Figure 1.1: Endeavour team structure.
Endeavour is the student rocketry team at The University of Edinburgh. There are three technical
projects: Darwin, the sounding rocket project, Maxwell, liquid engine project, and Bayes, thrust vector
controlled vehicle project. In addition, there are two non-technical teams working on outreach and
creatives. The outreach team goes to local high schools and wider audiences and does workshops
on rocket science and STEM. The creatives team narrates the journey to space from the student’s
perspective through various mediums. The management team (team lead, ﬁnance manager, outreach
lead, media and sponsorship lead, technical leads, operation lead) oversee the various aspects to lead
the ﬁve projects and integrate them under the roof of endeavour. Through eﬀective communication
and teamwork, the team has grown exponentially over the past two years. There are 43 members with
around half of the team dedicated to the Darwin team. Around 16% of the team is in the Maxwell
team, and Bayes make up about 6% of the team. A similar percentage of the members are in the
Outreach team, and 9% of our members are in the creatives team.
Figure 1.2: Darwin team structure.
Endeavour is composed of students from diﬀerent degree programs in The University of Edinburgh.
The majority of the team is from the School of Engineering and studies either mechanical engineering
or electrical and electronics engineering. The team also have members from the School of Informatics,
School of Physics, School of Chemistry, and School of Mathematics, with students studying computer
science, physics, chemical engineering, and mathematics. In addition, some of these members are from
Herriot-Watt University and Fife College, two local higher education institutions in Edinburgh, and
one member has recently completed a modern apprenticeship in CNC machining.
With these team members from a variety of backgrounds, endeavour aspires to advance the British
aerospace industry from the grassroots level and allow students to experience the aerospace industry
during university, especially since The University of Edinburgh does not yet have an active aerospace
department.
Our biggest supporters are The University of Edinburgh and various industry partners. In addition
to ﬁnancial support, the advice from experienced staﬀ and technicians from the University has been
invaluable in improving the design of Darwin II. The industry partners oﬀer ﬁnancial support and
provide access technologies and other industry players that would not otherwise be available. The
UnitedKingdomRocketryAssociation(UKRA)andtheScottishAeronauticsandRocketryAssociation
(SARA) were also able to oﬀer support with advice on various regulations and matters surrounding
amateur rocketry in the UK.
1
All CFRP components were gifted to the team by M-Carbo Composites, who are based in Belarus. This
allowed us to have industry-standard composite components that ensured the structural integrity of
the rocket. nTopology, Ansys, and Dassault Systemes allowed us to design, simulate, and optimise our
design through valuable software. RS GrassRoots supported the manufacturing and assembly process
with various tool kits, and Cirrus Logic gave ﬁnancial support that enabled various technical and
logistical activities. IRIS has gifted a particle detector to use in Darwin II’s payload, and playerdata
have oﬀered advice and support to the payload team. While the support from various stakeholders
and sponsors has been helpful, there were many challenges faced during the design and manufacture
of Darwin II. COVID-19 has brought many logistical challenges and restrictions in meetings and
manufacturing of the vehicle. It caused signiﬁcant delays and longer lead times in machining, acquiring
components, and assembly. The team has therefore spent the past year improving the rocket’s design,
ensuring that all necessary health and safety regulations are met whilst planning the manufacturing
processes.
2
Figure 1.3: Team sponsors.
Figure 1.4: Team stakeholders.
3
2. System Architecture
2.1 Overview
Darwin II is endeavour’s second sounding rocket design. It is designed for a 9 km apogee, and travels in
thesupersonicﬂightregime. Theﬁnallengthofthevehicleis2.66m, withatotalmassincludingmotors
of 35.5 kg and a 156.4 mm (6 inch) outer-diameter with 2 mm wall thickness. The fuselage is made
up of carbon-ﬁbre-reinforced polymer (CFRP), except for the radio frequency (RF) windows located
at the avionics bay and the nose cone, which are made out of glass-ﬁbre-reinforced polymer (GFRP).
The aft cone is additively manufactured from 3D printed continuous carbon ﬁbre. The bulkheads
are aluminium 6082-T6 and many non-structural components are 3D-printed with PLA. A student
research and developed (SRAD) airbrake system made up of aluminium and high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) allows for the manipulation of the drag generated after motor burnout and better target the
predicted apogee. Darwin II employs a dual deployment system, where separation and drogue chute
deployment occur at apogee at the nose cone using CO2 charges, and the main parachute is deployed
at an altitude of 500 m using a tender descender. The recovery system will be described in more detail
in Section 2.4.
Theﬂightcomputer(FC)ofDarwin II, namedMajor Tom, is comprised ofthreePCBs. Theﬁrstboard,
as shown in Figure J.2, holds the two Raspberry Pi’s for two cameras. The second board (Figure J.3)
acts as a SRAD ﬂight computer and holds the sensors, switches, outputs for the airbrake and recovery,
and sensory status indicators. The third board (Figure J.4) is used to mount the telemetry components,
a GPS module, commercial oﬀ the shelf (COTS) redundancies, and the camera that will be recording
the outside during ﬂight. Major Tom communicates with the ground control over RF for initialisation
at launch and data transmission during ﬂight and recovery. The sensors communicate with the central
microcontroller (Teensy 4.0) through SPI protocol and measurements are ﬁltered with a Kalman ﬁlter
for more accurate data. See Figure I.1 for a detailed software architecture, the diﬀerent phases, and
the conditions that deﬁnes each of the phases.
Darwin II’s scientiﬁc payload is a deployable body that ejects at apogee and houses its own recovery
system. It takes the form of a CANSat, housing the scientiﬁc instruments and a 1U CUBESat structure
housing telemetry and recovery subsystems. The CANSat collects environmental data as well as the
incidence of high-energy particle activity throughout the atmospheric column. Section 2.5 covers the
detailed structure, avionics, and other relevant information related to the payload.
2.2 Propulsion Subsystem
Engine Design
The ﬁrst major step in Darwin II’s design process was in selecting an appropriate motor: this decision
prescribes the thrust available throughout the ﬂight, and therefore imposes restrictions on the rocket’s
overall mass, aerodynamic properties and structural integrity, which are required in order for the rocket
to reach its target apogee of 9km. Since Darwin II is being entered into the COTS Solid Propellant
category, only motors of this type were considered in the design process. For additional simplicity, only
motors easily obtainable through the EuRoC competition were considered, and thus various motors
from Cesaroni’s Pro98 line of reloadable rocket motors were looked at. Figure 3.1 shows a cross-
sectional view of the Cesaroni’s Pro98 21062O3400-6GXL rocket motor casing, for which Darwin II’s
lower body is designed to integrate with.
4
Figure 2.1: Rocket motor casing cross-section.
Propellant
The motor selected (21062O3400-6GXL) uses the Imax propellant, which packs the maximum total
impulse in a given motor envelope (hence the name). The total impulse of Imax reloads is around
10-1%5 higher than that of any other reload in the same motor hardware. Imax reloads feature a large
ﬂame with a hint of green and a large volume of dense smoke. Despite not having the highest speciﬁc
impulse on the market, it has a higher density compared to other propellants available. Therefore, the
O3400 has a considerable total impulse.
Impulse
Following simple OpenRocket analysis during the early stages of design, and based on existing similar
rocket designs, it quickly became clear that a high thrust, high impulse motor, from either the top
range of the N class (total impulse of 10,240.01–20,480Ns) or low range of the O class (total impulse
of 20,480.01–40,960 Ns) was required. Figure 2.2 shows a comparison between the thrust curves of two
such motors: Cesaroni’s 21062O3400-P and 20146N5800-P, both of which provide suﬃcient thrust for
Darwin II’s design to exceed its target apogee under simulated conditions.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 70
2;000
4;000
6;000
8;000
Time [s]
Thrust Force [N]
Cesaroni 21062O3400-P
Cesaroni 20146N5800-P
Figure 2.2: Rocket motor thrust curve comparison.
Ultimately, the Cesaroni 2106203400-P has been selected as Darwin II’s ﬁrst choice motor. Its lower
peak thrust compared to the 20146N5800-P results in a reduced risk of failure caused by stresses on
the motor mounting assembly due to this load. The chosen motor also takes longer to reach this peak
force, resulting in less of a shock load being applied, and ultimately lower inertial forces on the rocket’s
body due to the lower acceleration caused by the reduced thrust force.
5
Arming and Ignition
As a COTS motor, no special arming and ignition sequence is necessary. The manufacturer introduces
the use of an e-match connected at the bottom of the motor (nozzle), which can then be ignited
remotely once everyone is within a safe range from the rocket, as per EuRoC’s launch system layout.
Once the e-match is activated by an electrical signal, the solid propellant of the rocket engine starts
its combustion, accelerating the air and propelling the rocket to the sky.
2.3 Aerostructure Subsystem
2.3.1 External
Carbon Fibre Components
Early on in the design process, the decision was made to use CFRP as the primary material in the
rocket’s airframe. CFRP’s high strength-weight ratio make it an obvious candidate for use in the
rocket’s airframe. Following the in-house manufacture of a roll-wrapped CFRP tube for endeavour’s
ﬁrst sounding rocket design, Darwin I, and the various challenges that this presented without access
to suitable industrial equipment, the decision was made to outsource the manufacture of Darwin II’s
CFRP components. The manufacture of the CFRP airframe and motor-mount sleeve used in Darwin
II was carried out using state-of-the-art ﬁlament winding technology, with a winding angle of 15 as
per manufacturers’ recommendations, to provide the best compromise between strength under axial
and bending loads.
All ﬂat CFRP components (ﬁns and their relevant connectors) have been manufactured using sheets
of CFRP consisting of a 3k tow, which have then been precision manufactured using a CNC cutting
process. The resulting components from these processes are shown in Figure 2.3.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2.3: Filament wound CFRP (a) motor mount tube and (b) body tube alongside sheet
CFRP ﬁns, images courtesy of M-Carbo.
RF Transparent Sections
One of the biggest disadvantages of using a CFRP fuselage is the lack of radio frequency transparency:
the carbon ﬁbres in the matrix conduct electricity and cause the fuselage to act as a Faraday cage,
thus preventing the passage of radio waves through it. To solve this issue, the parts of the fuselage
that contain radio frequency transmitters, or signal emitters, are made of GFRP. Glass ﬁber does not
conduct electricity and therefore allows RF signals to pass through. The sections with RF transparency
can be seen in Figure 2.4. The RF transparent sections make up a 3-sided fuselage, used in the
6
Figure 2.4: Cross section of Darwin II, black fuselage representing CFRP and the yellow one
for GFRP (RF transparent)
electronics bay, manufactured using wet layup glass ﬁbre, and the nose cone, manufactured using a
continuous ﬁbre 3D print with a blend of kevlar and glass ﬁbre. To ensure there is no interference,
both RF transparent sections are at least two body diameters in length.
2.3.2 Internal
Section Interfaces
The rocket can be divided into three main sections:
• A lower section containing the motor, ﬁns, aft cone, motor sleeve, centering rings and motor
bulkhead.
• An electronics bay: which holds all electronics components, the air brakes system, the fuselage
(including three rods for structural strength), recovery bulkhead and recovery activation systems.
• Nose cone and payload.
The three main interfaces are highlighted in red in Figure 2.5. Starting from the aft end of the rocket,
there is the motor bulkhead, a machined part from aluminum 6082-T6, optimized for weight reduction
and stiﬀness. It interfaces with half of a body-diameter of the lower fuselage and is secured to the
fuselage through 12 M3 bolts. A machined groove for the attachment and centering of the motor sleeve
is included, as well as a shoulder for the top of the motor.
Figure 2.5: Render of Darwin II with transparent fuselage. The three interfaces are highlighted
in red.
7
Figure 2.6: Avionics bay and nose cone assemblies. Highlighted in red are the interfaces. The
two green cylinders in the middle represent the parachutes.
There are three threaded steel rods screwed to the motor bulkhead that carry the rocket’s structural
loads through the avionics section, as shown in Figure 2.6. Moving forwards, the three rods are bolted
to the machined aluminum 6082-T6 recovery bulkhead. A body-diameter long coupling tube is glued to
the bulkhead for additional interference. It also includes a 3D printed extension to increase the bonded
surface between the bulkhead and the coupling tube. The recovery fuselage, where the parachutes and
lines are stored, is glued permanently to this bulkhead assembly and reinforced with 6 M3 bolts.
The last interface is between the recovery fuselage and the nose cone-payload assembly. As this is the
only section of the rocket that separates for recovery deployment, the stiﬀness and integrity of this is a
priority for the safety of launch and a successful recovery. For this reason a conventional coupling tube
has been employed here, extending a full body-diameter to either side of the separation point. This
coupling tube can be seen on the right of Figure 2.6. It is bonded with epoxy to the CFRP recovery
fuselage, making a solid piece with the recovery bulkhead which is also glued to the fuselage. The
coupling tube is held to the nose cone with 4 M2 Nylon shear pins, which will break once the CO2
canisters have been ﬁred, separating the nose cone and deploying the drogue parachute. More detail
about the interfaces between the Payload and the Nosecone can be found in Section 2.5.
Motor Retention and Load Transfer
The motor has a positive retention mechanism to prevent failure and release from the rocket. A 3/8”
Shoulder Head Socket Screw (SHSS) screws into the motor through a centre hole in the motor bulkhead.
The SHSS is used to locate and secure the motor, and is not responsible for the transfer of the thrust
force to the motor bulkhead. The motor also has a relatively snug ﬁt inside the motor sleeve which
will help to stop unwanted rotation of the motor when being handled.
The motor must be secured in place using a motor casing. The casing is made from ﬁlament-wound
CFRP to provide a strong, lightweight part. There are 3 equispaced centering rings located across the
motor sleeve to keep the casing in line with the outer body of the rocket, as seen in Figure 2.7. These
will help distribute the lateral forces on the airframe as well as the motor bulkhead by keeping the
motor centered. There are also three sets of connectors on the motor sleeve for ﬁn attachment, and
will pass through the body tube to lock the rotation of the motor sleeve. These connectors will then be
further strengthened by laying up GFRP on the connectors and the interfaces with the outer tube to
ensure no movement of the ﬁn root. In addition, the ﬁns and ﬁn attachments also help with centring
the motor as the ﬁns pass through the lower body. The combination of these securing techniques
provides a solid mount for the motor as it is ﬁxed axially, laterally and vertically.
8
Figure 2.7: Render of the lower section of Darwin II with the fuselage being suppressed to see
the internal structure
Near the bottom of the motor there is a ’lip’ which has a larger diameter compared to the rest. This
lip will provide a surface for the thrust to be transferred. The motor sleeve extends all the way from
the lip to the motor bulkhead to allow thrust transfer. This single continuous part will distribute the
loads over a large area of the motor bulkhead and take away the loads from the SHSS.
Mechanical connections
Motor SHSS:the motor SHSS is not a structural connection and is only there to retain the motor and
to stop it falling from the rocket. It is 3/8" in diameter and secured through the motor bulkhead.
Recovery/motor bulkhead structural rod connections:there are three 8mm rods that run from
the motor bulkhead through the avionics bay to the recovery bulkhead. They are 120 degrees apart,
as shown in Figure 2.8. The rods screw into the motor bulkhead, secured using brackets that tighten
onto the the rods, and bolted with nylon lock nuts that secure the rods to the recovery bulkhead.
These structural rods are used to transfer some the thrust of the rocket rather than relying on just the
fuselage of the rocket to handle these large thrust forces.
Figure 2.8: Render of the avionics bay. Motor bulkhead on the bottom, one of the avionics
bay fuselage section in between, and the recovery bulkhead on top. Light green components
represents the PCBs, blue for batteries, and dark grey for CO2 canisters
9
Recovery bay eyebolt: the recovery bay eyebolt will have to withstand the force of a sudden
decelerating rocket at apogee. It should slow the descent of the rocket from 30 m/s to 7 m/s in a short
amount of time. The recovery bulkhead is 8 mm thick, but if a small diameter connection is used,
then the force would be concentrated onto a small area and cause failure. Therefore, an M10 eyebolt
is used as it provides a greater area for the force to act over.
Rail guides:the rail guides are secured tangentially to the body tube. The upper rail guide attaches
to the motor bulkhead, and the lower rail guide uses a small block inside the body tube to mount
onto. The lower guide will have to rely on the strength of the body tube and it transfer of loads to the
motor sleeve, motor bulkhead and rest of the rocket. The upper guide has a more secure attachment
compared to the lower guide as some of the forces will be directed to the bulkhead. However, the lower
rail guide does not need as solid of a connection since lower rail guides typically have less forces acting
on them.
Flanges: the ﬂanges are used to give extra material for the screws to embed into, as well as an overlap
for connecting coupling tubes and body tubes. The ﬂanges allow the potential lateral forces on the
tubes to be spread over a larger area. If they are too short, the body/coupling tubes can act as a lever
and introduce large stresses into the airframe. In the motor bulkhead there is a large ﬂange projected
to the aft end that allows two rows of oﬀset screws to be placed to secure body tube in place. If no
ﬂange were to be used, the bulkhead would have to be thickened to allow for a suitable mounting
points for the screws. However, the ﬂange allows the thickness of the bulkhead to be reduced and only
extend the perimeter that comes into contact directly with the fuselage.
Another beneﬁt that ﬂanges has is that it provides a suitable surface to line up the body tube. For
example, the body tube for the upper section of the rocket will slip over the ﬂange and will then be
screwed into position. The extra surface area that the ﬂange provides for the body tube helps to spread
any forces more evenly over the body tube interface, as well as providing a greater seal for the recovery
sequence.
2.3.3 Numerical Analysis
Trajectory simulations
To validate that Darwin II’s design is capable of exceeding its target apogee with the chosen motor
and airframe design described above (including budgeted masses for payload, recovery and avionics
subsystems), ﬂight trajectory simulations were performed and compared using two pieces of software:
OpenRocket and RASAero II. OpenRocket beneftis from a superior UI and integration of optimisa-
tion features, which were utilised throughout the design process. However, in the supersonic regime,
which Darwin II is expected to reach, OpenRocket suﬀers from poorer accuracy as a result of various
simplifying assumptions used in its calculation of drag.
10
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.9: Darwin II schematic in (a) OpenRocket and (b) RASAero II.
Compounded with other factors, such as little previous launch experience within the team, as well as
high sensitivity of the simulations to factors such as surface ﬁnish and centre of gravity, it is clear
that there is going to be a considerable inherent level of error in any simulations carried out in both
OpenRocket and RASAero II. As such, the results of these simulations are used merely as a guide for
predicting the rocket’s apogee, with the aim of "ﬁne-tuning" this prediction actively throughout the
rocket’sﬂightusinganactivelycontrolledairbrakesystem, discussedinmoredetailinSection2.6.
11
0 50 100 150 200 2500
2;000
4;000
6;000
8;000
Time [s]
Altitude [m]
OpenRocket
RASAero II
(a)
0 20 40 60 80 1000
200
400
600
Time [s]
Velocity [m/s]
Openrocket
RASAero II
(b)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 50
0
50
100
150
Time [s]
Acceleration [m/s2]
Openrocket
RASAero II
(c)
0 10 20 30 400
1
2
3
4
5
Time [s]
Stability [calbers]
Openrocket
RASAero II
(d)
Figure 2.10: Comparison between OpenRocket and RASAero II simulated (a) altitude, (b)
velocity, (c) acceleration and (d) stability over duration of ﬂight. Note, RASAero II does not
include recovery system, hence the large discrepancy in results following apogee.
A summary of the key results of these simulations are given in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1: Key trajectory simulation results.
Parameter OpenRocket RASAeroII Units
Apogee 9,044 9,112 m
Max. velocity 575 604 m/s
Max. acceleration 141 156 m/s 2
Stability oﬀ rail 1.8 2.0 -
The above simulations are carried out assuming the rocket is launched at an angle of 84 pointing
upwards from the horizontal. They also incorporate a simple wind model, assuming an average wind
speed of approximately 3 m=s, a reasonable value for October in Ponte de Sôr, with a standard
deviation of 0.3m=s and a wind direction that is parallel to the horizontal. However, in order to better
understand the inﬂuence of wind speed on the overall trajectory of the rocket, a simple sensitivity
12
analysis was carried out in OpenRocket for a range of wind speeds, ranging from 0 to 6 m/s, the
results of which are presented in Figure 2.11
0 500 1;000 1;500 2;000 2;500 3;0000
1;000
2;000
3;000
4;000
5;000
6;000
7;000
8;000
9;000
Position East of Launch [m]
Altitude [m]
0 m/s wind
3 m/s wind
6 m/s wind
Figure 2.11: OpenRocket wind sensitivity analysis.
From this it can be seen that, whilst not having a major impact on the predicted apogee, increasing
wind speed does have signiﬁcant eﬀect on the rocket’s drift during descent. Note, the results shown
here are for an upwind launch, and therefore should the rocket be launched downwind the resutls would
be reversed, and the rocket would drift further East of launch during its descent.
In addition to the use of OpenRocket and RASAero, a simple in-house trajectory simulation software
was developed in the MATLAB-based graphical programming environment Simulink. This software
was developed with the intention of using the same equations of motion as those used in OpenRocket,
but with added model interactivity which incorporates calculation of drag provided by the airbrake
subsystem, as well as simulation of the recovery of a deployable payload.
Detailed Aerodynamic Analysis
With the aim of going supersonic with Darwin II, it is vital that all of the vehicle’s aerodynamic surfaces
are well understood prior to launch and that the chances of achieving a successful ﬂight are maximised
through ensuring the chosen design is suﬃciently stable and eﬃcient. Due to the complexity involved
in accurately modelling supersonic ﬂow, endeavour enlisted the help of a ﬁnal-year MEng student at
The University of Edinburgh, Liam Foley, who undertook a year-long research project focusing on this
challenge. All subsequent methodology and results outlined in this section are credited to Liam.
The focus of this work was divided into two main stages: performing initial analytical simulations to
be used for veriﬁcation, and a numerical analysis of a full 3D model of the rocket. For the purpose
of keeping this section concise, the focus will be on the latter of the two stages, in which Darwin II’s
geometry was imported into the commercial Computational Fluid Dynamics based simulation software,
StarCCM+. Within StarCCM+, the the solver conditions, surfaces, and boundary conditions of the
domain were deﬁned. In simulating Darwin II, a steady-state, three-dimensional, inviscid ideal gas ﬂow
solver was used. A coupled implicit method was chosen and a Courant number of 1.0 was used.
13
• Steady-state: due to the rocket’s aerodynamic proﬁle, there will be relatively low drag force
and therefore it can be assumed that the deceleration experienced will be slow. As such, quasi-
steady-state analysis is suitable.
• Inviscid: viscous eﬀects are generally negligible compared to pressure eﬀects, therefore assuming
that the ﬂow is inviscid will give an accurate result.
• Three-dimensional: due to the geometry of the rocket, a 2D simpliﬁcation is unrealistic. Simu-
lation time has been reduced by sectioning the smallest repeating symmetrical section on of the
rocket, a length-wise 60° section from the nose cone tip to the end of the aft cone.
A summary of the initial conditions used in the simulation of Darwin II are summarised in Ta-
ble 2.2.
Table 2.2: Initial conditions used in CFD simulations.
Flow property Initial conditions Units
Altitude 10,000 m
Flow velocity 1.8 Mach
Local speed of sound 299.8 m/s
Velocity 539.64 m/s
Freestream density 0.414 kg/m 3
Freestream pressure 26,500 Pa
Freestream temperature 223.3 K
The results of the computational simulation can be seen in Figure 2.12, which shows the velocity
distribution and Mach number. In Figures 2.13 and 2.14 show the Mach distribution in more detail
and the temperature around the ﬁns. The results of the simulations were validated analytically. This
analysis help the design of the aerodynamic surfaces of the rocket, implementing a front and rear taper
in the ﬁns to reduce the stagnation zone behind the ﬁns for reduction in drag and temperature. Another
change from this analysis was the reduction of the leading edge angle of the ﬁns. This will reduce the
eﬀect of the shock waves traveling along the span of the ﬁn, which will increase the eﬀects of the shock
waves towards the tip. This will increase the pressure on the main surface of the ﬁn, which will pull
the CoP further towards the aft of the rocket at supersonic speeds, increasing the stability.
14
Figure 2.12: A side-on view of the Darwin II rocket simulation showing the velocity of the ﬂow
around the rocket.
Figure 2.13: Plots of Mach number of air-ﬂow around (a) the tip of the nose cone and (b) the
ﬁns and tail of the rocket.
Figure 2.14: Plot of air-ﬂow temperature around the ﬁns.
To add to the analysis carried out in the previous section, a summary of the positions of the Centre of
Pressure and Centre of Gravity during the ascent are given in Figure 2.16, which compares the values
obtained in OpenRocket with those obtained through the above described CFD simulations.
15
0 0:5 1 1:5 2 2:5 30:9
0:95
1
1:05
1:1
1:15
1:2
Nose cone
Main body
Fin
Aft cone
Distance from nose cone tip [m]
Temperature coeﬃcient [-]
(a)
0 0:5 1 1:5 2 2:5 30:6
0:8
1
1:2
1:4
1:6
Nose cone
Main body
Fin
Aft cone
Distance from nose cone tip [m]
Pressure coeﬃcient [-]
(b)
Figure 2.15: Distribution of (a) temperature and (b) pressure along the length of the rocket.
Figure 2.16: Schematic veiw of Darwin II showing Centre of Gravity at beginning (Orange) and
end (Black) of the boost phase, along with Centre of Pressure calculated using OpenRocket at
subsonic velocities (Blue) and supersonic velocities (Red), and from CFD simulations (Black).
16
Expected Loading
To ensure the safety and structural strength of Darwin II’s airframe and its connections, an under-
standing of the magnitude of structural loads that will be encountered throughout its ﬂight is essential.
As endeavour’s ﬁrst attempt at performing a detailed structural analysis of a rocket design, the ap-
proach taken for estimating the loads the rocket’s airframe is subjected to is a simple one: for the
determination of axial loads, the rocket is treated as a 1-D rigid beam, with the axial load at any
point along the rocket’s length, at any instant during the ﬂight, calculated by summing the axial forces
acting at this point. Such an approach requires dividing the rocket into segments, along which the
acting drag force is assumed to be a constant and the mass is assumed to increase linearly along the
length of the segment. Figure 2.17 details the various segments chosen for this simpliﬁed approach,
and the loads acting on each.
Figure 2.17: Treatment of axial loads on rocket’s airframe structure.
This method can then be used to calculate the expected axial load at any point along the rocket’s
length using the following equation:
Fa(x;t ) =
i=6X
i=1
[Fa;i 1(t) +FT;i (t)  ax(t) mi(x)  FD;i(t)] (2.1)
whereFa is the axial force acting at the chosen point at a distancex from the nose cone tip at a time
t into the duration of the rocket’s ascent.Fa;i 1 is the total axial force acting on all segments in the
forward direction of the chosen point andFT is the motor’s thrust force. The inertial force due to the
rocket’s acceleration is accounted for through the termax mi whereax is the rocket’s acceleration in
the x-direction andmi is the total mass of all rocket segments in the forward direction of the chosen
point, as well as the total forward mass of that particular segment at the chosen point. Finally, the
drag force acting on each segment is accounted for through the termFD.
For a full, detailed analysis and explanation of these various loads, see Appendix H. Using the above
approach, a plot detailing the axial force along the length of the rocket throughout the duration of the
motor’s burn is obtained, shown in Figure 2.18. From this, it is then possible to extract the time at
which the maximum axial loads are experienced, shown in Figure 2.19.
17
0
1
2
3
0
2
4
6
 2;000
 1;000
0
1;000
2;000
3;000
x [m]t [s]
Fa [N]
 1;500
 1;000
 500
0
500
1;000
1;500
2;000
2;500
Figure 2.18: 3-D plot showing the variation in axial forces on the rocket’s airframe along its
length during the motor’s burn time.
0 0:5 1 1:5 2 2:5 3
 2;000
 1;000
0
1;000
2;000
3;000
Nose cone
Main body
Fin
Aft cone
x [m]
Fa [N]
 2
 1
0
1
2
3
106
 [Pa]
Figure 2.19: Maximum axial force and axial stress acting along the length of the airframe.
From this analysis, it is clear that the stresses experienced by the vehicle’s airframe are low in com-
parison to the yield strength of both CFRP and GFRP, with a more detailed analysis of the critical
loads and their eﬀect being looked at in the following section.
18
Critical Loading Analysis
To ensure that the critical load bearing parts of Darwin II are suﬃciently strong, static stress analysis
using FEM was performed on the aft cone cap, the motor bulkhead, and the recovery bulkhead using
a software called nTopology.
The ﬁrst part analysed is the aft cone cap. This part is responsible for transferring the thrust of the
motor to the motor sleeve, which then transfers it to the motor bulkhead. As this part is directly
responsible for transferring the thrust of the motor to the rest of the rocket, the force acting on it is
due to the inertia of the rocket minus the motor. With the mass of the rocket (not including the motor)
is constant during ascend, the largest force this part experiences is when the vehicle is undergoing peak
acceleration. The magnitude of this force is calculated using the following equation:
F = (mtotal  mmotor) apeak (2.2)
Where F is the inertia force on the aft cone cap,mtotal is the total mass of the rocket (about 34.6 kg),
mmotor is the mass of the motor at launch (about 16.8 kg) andapeak is the peak acceleration (expected
to be about 15 g). Using the equation above, a maximum force of 2619.3 N is expected, but for this
simulation a peak acceleration of 22.5 g is used for a high FoS, which raises the maximum force to
3928.9 N. This force acts along the small lip of the motor casing and then transferred through the aft
cone cap into the motor sleeve’s bottom face. These faces were used as boundaries, with the lip of the
motor being the surface where the inertia force is acting, and the motor sleeve’s bottom face being a
displacement constraint. The results of the analysis are shown in Figure 2.20.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2.20: Results of the static analysis of the (a) top and (b) bottom faces of the aft cone
cap
According to the analysis, the largest stress on the cap is about 28 MPa. This part is manufactured out
of Al 6082-T6, which has a yield stress of about 260 MPa. With the yield stress of this alloy being 9.3
times larger than the maximal stress experienced, the part is deemed safe. Using an acceleration in the
analysis that is 1.5 times larger than the expected peak further conﬁrms the safety of this part.
Analysis the motor bulkhead was done in a similar manner. This part is responsible for transferring
the thrust from the lower body, through avionics bay, and to the upper body. Using equation 2.2 with
a peak acceleration of 22.5 g (for the same reason as before), total mass of 34.6 kg, and replacing
mmotor with mlower, wheremlower is the mass of the lower body (about 21.5 kg), gives a maximum
inertia force of 2891.5 N. Technically the lower body’s skin is also connected to the bulkhead, but it
19
is screwed into the bulkhead’s outer radius, and as its mass is negligible to the rest of the rocket that
is being accelerated by the bulkhead, it is not included in the analysis. The maximum inertia force
of 2891.5 N acts along the groove the motor sleeve and is transferred to the three rods that form the
structure of the avionics bay. Taking these into consideration, the groove’s horizontal surface (where
the surface on the top face of the motor sleeve touches) is the surface at which the inertia force acts,
and as the rods are screwed into the tapped holes of the bulkhead, the displacement restraint is the
cylindrical surface of the tapped holes. The results of the analysis are shown in Figure 2.21.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2.21: Results of the static analysis of the (a) top and (b) bottom faces of the motor
bulkhead. To reduce computation, the shoulder that adds extra stability to the skin connection
was shortened during the analysis as the thrust is not transferred through it.
The analysis shows that the largest stress on the bulkhead is 37.5 MPa. Like the aft cone cap, this
part is also Al 6082-T6, with a yield stress of 260 MPa. With the yield stress of this alloy being 6.9
times larger than the maximal stress experienced, the part is deemed safe. Using an acceleration in the
analysis that is 1.5 times larger than the expected peak further conﬁrms the safety of this part.
The recovery bulkhead is connected to the upper body through a large surface, which reduces stress
accumulations during ascent. However, when the main chute opens during descent, all the inertia
force is transferred through the eye bolt and then through the three rods of the avionics bay that are
secured to the recovery bulkhead. This can create stress accumulation at the eyebolt and the the area
where the three rods are secured, which can lead to failure. The analysis used a peak force of 2000 N,
while 1300 N was expected to be the maximum force on the eyebolt. Since the time of the analysis,
the payload area underwent a slight change which resulted in the maximal force being smaller than
1300 N. A new analysis was not done because if the part is suitable for 2000 N, then decreasing the
force acting on it makes it more safe. Calculating the expected force is done using equation 2.8 that
is described in section 2.4.3. As the chute is attached to the eyebolt, the force is transferred to the
bulkhead through the tapped hole of the bolt and then the into the three rods of the avionics bay
through the securing nuts. As a result, the cylindrical surface of the eyebolt’s hole is where the 2000
N acts, and the top surface of the bulkhead where the nuts are secured is the displacement restraint.
The results of the analysis are shown in Figure 2.22 below.
20
(a)
 (b)
Figure 2.22: Results of the static analysis of the (a) top and (b) bottom faces of the recovery
bulkhead.
The analysis shows that the largest stress on the bulkhead is 94 MPa. Like the two previous parts,
this bulkhead is also Al 6082-T6, with a yield stress of 260 MPa. With the yield stress of this alloy
being 2.8 times larger than the maximal stress experienced, the part is deemed safe. Using a force for
the analysis that is much larger than the expected one further conﬁrms the safety of this part.
2.4 Recovery Subsystem
2.4.1 Introduction
The Darwin II recovery system is a dual deployment two-chute system consisting of a 24-inch drogue
parachute, a 96-inch main parachute, aCO 2 canister powered ejection mechanism and a pyrotechnic
staging system.
2.4.2 Components and Speciﬁcations
The components of the DII recovery system are as follows:
1. Rocketman 96-inch High Performance Parachute, 1x – Main Parachute
2. Rocketman 24-inch Elliptical Parachute, 1x – Drogue Parachute
3. Tinder Rocketry RAPTORCO 2 Ejection System, 2x
4. Rocketman Shock Cord, 1x
5. Rocketman Y-harness, 3x
6. Eye Bolt M8 x 18mm, 2x
7. 25 x 0.3m E-match, 1x
8. 23g CO2 Canister, 2x
9. Fruity Chutes L2 Recovery Tether, 1x
The parachute speciﬁcations are as given in Table A.2.
21
2.4.3 Recovery Subsystem Calculations
The parachute sizes were calculated from solving the drag equation 2.3 as follows:
Fd = Cdr2v2
2 (2.3)
Where the symbols correspond to the following physical parameters:
• Fd - Drag force acting on the rocket measured in Newtons (N)
• Cd - Drag Coeﬃcient
•  - Air Density for a given altitude in kilogrammes per cubic metre (kg=m3)
• r - Radius of the parachute in metres (m)
• v - Descent speed of the rocket in metres per second (m=s)
Equating the drag force to the rocket’s weight and rearranging for r, we have that:
r =
r 2mg
Cdv (2.4)
Where:
• m - Mass of the rocket in kilogrammes (kg)
• g - Acceleration due to gravity in metres per square second (m=s2)
The results are given in Table 2.3 below:
Table 2.3: Range of radii of drogue and main for successful recovery
Chute
Parameter Drogue Main Unit
Deployment
Altitude 10 0.5 km
Range of
CDValues 1.6<CD < 2:2
Air Density 0.4135 1.225 kg/m 3
Target Speed
Range 23<v<46 v<9 m/s
Calculated Range
of Radii 0.42<r<0.94 1.14<r<1.54 m
*The range of CD values was based upon what was quoted in commercially available parachutes.
From the results in Table 2.3, a shortlist of suitable commercially available parachutes was written
up from which the Rocketman 96-inch, high performance toroidal parachute and 24-inch, elliptical
parachute were selected in order to give a high speed of descent while minimising wind drift.
22
In order for the recovery system to deploy, theCO2 gas has to exert enough pressure given in equation
2.5.
Pressure (lb=in2) = Force (lb)
Area(in2) (2.5)
The volume of the recovery bay is given in equation 2.6:
Volume (in3) =   (diameter(in))2 length(in)
4 (2.6)
If we know the pressure required to deploy the recovery system, then the mass of BP we require is
given by equation 2.7, and the mass ofCO 2 is simply ﬁve times the required mass of BP.
mB P = PV
RT (2.7)
Where:
• mB P - Mass of BP in grammes, (g)
• P - Pressure required to eject the nose cone and drogue chute in (lb=in2)
• V - Volume of Free Recovery Bay in (in3)
• R - Combustion Gas Constant of FFFF BPRB P = 22:16ftlbf=lbm R
• T - Combustion Gas Temperature, for FFFF BP,TB P = 3307 R
The results of our calculations are given in Table A.2 in Appendix A.
At the centre, an M10 eyebolt is anchored in with an M10 hex nut, which should provide a large area
to dissipate the jerking force of the parachute deployment. With a bad case scenario of a 1560N force,
from a sudden opening of 0.5s, from 32m/s to 6m/s at 30kg. Using SolidWorks simulations, it came
to a factor of safety of 4.3 before yield stress is reached.
F = mV
t (2.8)
Where:
• F - Force inN
• m - Mass of the rocket inkg
• V - Change in velocity from deployment inm=s
• t - Time for the main parachute to deploy ins
2.4.4 Recovery Simulation
The descent of the rocket was simulated using a combination of analytical and computational tools.
First we analyse the time and velocity of the recovery using the equations described in section 2.4.3.
We validated these results with the OpenRocket one, showed in Figure 2.10. Finally we created the
MATLAB Simulink code so we could analyse the recovery distance, time and area of recovery in a
home-developed software. This analysis shows that even with high wind conditions for a safety launch
(no more than 20 km/h wind-speed) the recovery Area will be within 1km of the launch pad.
23
2.4.5 Recovery sequence
For the recovery of the rocket, a dual deployment system will be implemented. This will involve a
jettison of the payload and nosecone that will fall separately to the main body of the rocket. At apogee,
the RAPTORCO2 ejection system will activate, releasing the gas from two 23 gCO2 canisters. The
expansion of theCO 2 will result in shear pins holding the nose cone in place to break. This will allow
the drogue chute to be released and inﬂate at apogee, bringing the main body descent speed to a
predicted 28 m/s. The main body should descend at this speed until it reaches an altitude of 500 m,
where the main parachute will be released. This will be done by using a Tender Descender L2, which
once activated, will allow the drogue to pull the main parachute bag up, which will release the main
parachute, slowing the rocket body to 6 m/s until it lands.
Figure 2.23: Diagram showing the connections present at the launch stage in the recovery
system
The main parachute and TD (Tender Descender) will be anchored to the eyebolt in the centre of the
recovery bulkhead using quicklinks. The body of the TD is then attached to the eyebolt using a kevlar
lanyard to prevent it escaping once activated. The drogue parachute will be connected to the top
24
quicklink on the TD using a shock cord. A seprate kevlar Y-harness will connect the main parachute
bag to the top TD quicklink to stop the bag from moving up the recovery bay. Both the RAPTOR
and TD have redundant ignition charges, in the event that there is a failure on one of the charges in
either system.
2.5 Payload Subsystem
Introduction
Endeavour’s Payload for this edition of EuRoC was designed to be modular and able to ﬂy on several
diﬀerent types of missions. Its ﬁrst mission was at Mach 21, a payload competition taking place at
Machrihanish AFB, which required us to use a CANSat format with a 350g mass limit. Following
EuRoC, we are scheduled to ﬂy aboard of Darwin I, the Team’s 3000 ft, subsonic launcher. We
created an "Advanced Mission’s Pack" to operate our Payload even aboard Darwin II, with greater
accelerations and lower temperatures. The Pack augments the CANSat capabilities and introduces
telemetry and dual-event recovery systems housed in a CUBESat structure, allowing us to control our
descent and capture atmospheric and radiation data more reliably.
Figure2.24: CrossSectionviewoftheNosecone, theCANSatandtheCUBESatafterseparation
from the main body.
Mass and Form Factor
Re-usability and modularity across a variety of missions was a critical mission requirement. Most
of the sensing electronics - including the radiation sensing instrumentation - reside within a standard
CANSat enclosure (66 mm in diameter and 160 mm in height). The recovery hardware and the relevant
recovery and telemetry electronics are housed in a 1U CUBESat enclosure (100mm x 100mm x 100mm).
The two modules are fully independent electrically, with their own power supplies, and are coupled
mechanically through an M6 Eye Bolt, placed to allow the loads from the mission’s most violent event
(Main Chute deployment) to optimally traverse the craft and prevent catastrophic failure. Following
separation, the Nosecone and Payload remain coupled, descending as an unit, independent from the
main body tube. In the following points we dig deeper into the speciﬁcs of each module. Detailed
mass budgets are given in Appendix G, Figures G.1 and G.2.
CANSat form factor:For this section, we were restricted by the Mach 21 regulations to a maximum
of350g. Thestructureiscomposedoftwomodular, lightweightaluminiumverticalplateswhichsupport
25
all of the electronics. The plates are secured to an upper and lower poly-carbonate bulkheads. The
CNC machines at the student Maker Space could not handle metals, and poly-carbonate was the
natural choice, representing the intersection of low cost, low mass and manufacturability. The plates
are bolted on to the bulkheads such that the SRBF composite external shell is clamped and held in
place thanks to lips carved in the bulkheads.
CUBESat form factor:Darwin II can launch up to 4kg, putting a limit on the mass of the CUBESat
at 3.65kg - more than suﬃcient. The frame is constructed from a lightweight aluminium plate, strong
stainless steel corner rails, and GFRP faces all around. An important factor to consider is the eﬀect
of an extended descent-time on the down-range drift. While it is desirable tominimise the mass at
liftoﬀ to increase our chances of reaching apogee at 9000m, it is also desirable todescend rapidly, so
that cross-winds do not make ground recovery eﬀorts too lengthy. It was decided to couple the system
to the nosecone so that they could descend as a single body. This design change allowed us to increase
the mass being supported by the Payload parachuteswithout adding any mass to the lift-oﬀ weight of
Darwin II. The aluminium and steel structure is enclosed in GFRP sheets on the four lateral faces, in
order to ensure RF transparency necessary for the GPS Ceramic Patch Receiver. The upper face of the
cube is open and exposes the custom-made GRFP recovery bay, which houses the main 30” parachute,
the Tender Descender pyrotechnic device and the relevant shock-cords. This bay includes two small,
separate compartments for the batteries and the pyrotechnic device, mitigating the risks of damaging
or catching the lines or the parachute. All the electronics to handle GPS tracking, telemetry and
downlink communications, as well as our COTS ﬂight computer, are housed below the recovery bay.
The 868MHz omni-directional stub antenna for ground communications is held within a 3D-printed
housing epoxied to the outer shell of the CANSat to maximise the chances of perfect Line of Sight
(LOS) communication with the ground station. Similarly, the COTS EggTimer GPS Mini Transmitter
mandated by the Altitude Logging and Transmission Addendum is epoxied to the side of the CANSat
through a 3D printed adapter.
Figure 2.25: Render showing the CUBESat and CANSat ready to be integrated. Note that the
transparency of the outer shells has been altered to facilitate grasp internal layout
26
Removal, Interface and Deployment
The payload is mounted "upside-down" during launch. After deployment, aerodynamic forces acting
on the nosecone shell and drogue parachute will force the Payload+Nosecone system in a stable "nose-
down" conﬁguration. There are two key interfaces with the Upper Body of the rocket. Moving
afterwards, the ﬁrst of these interfaces is a GFRP ring epoxied to the inner diameter of the upper-
body coupling tube, which supports a round GFRP pusher plate upon which one of the CUBESat’s
faces lay. During launch, this ring contributes to supporting the weight of the payload. Not being
connected to its support ring by bolted connections or adhesives, during the CO2 over-pressure event
that initiates the recovery phase, the plate acts as a piston. The shear pins that connect the Nosecone
to the body tube fail, and the assembly separates permanently.
There is a further interface connecting the Payload to the Nosecone, coupling the two for the whole
mission, including descent. The 8mm thick Bulkhead is made of continuous carbon ﬁber reinforced
nylon, selected for its excellent impact resistance and strength comparable to aluminium. It connects
to the bottom face of the CUBESat and features a cutout for the CANSat to pass through. Reinforcing
ribs housing threaded inserts extend to the inner face of the Nosecone, allowing for 6 short countersunk
bolts to secure the Bulkhead to the Nosecone.
This coupling structure allows the payload to be easily worked on on launch day. After ﬁnal electronics
tests, the pusher plate is laid onto its support ring and the bulkhead is bolted onto the CUBESat lower
face. The payload is then lowered into the Nosecone and the fasteners connecting the Bulkhead to
the Nosecone can be screwed in. Finally, the Nosecone+Payload Assembly is slid onto the upper
coupling tube, and the shear pins are inserted, completing the upper body integration.In Figure 2.26,
the diﬀerent elements of the assembly are distinguished based on colour: the Upper Coupling tube
(yellow), the Pusher Plate (green), the Payload Bulkhead (red) and Nosecone (blue).
Figure 2.26: Colourised Cross Section of the Nosecone-Payload Assembly
Functionality
This payload accomplishes a series of main missions. It has its two scientiﬁc objectives, which are
entirely performed by the CANSat:
1. To characterise the radiation environment at altitude by collecting snapshots of high-energy
particles using a reverse-engineered RasPIX - a CERN-developed particle detector.
27
2. To collect atmospheric data from a collection of environmental monitoring sensors (EMC - En-
vironmental Monitoring Cluster), and build a data bank that can be compared with previous
and future ﬂights.
In addition, it acts as anengineering demonstrator to experiment with deployable payloads and all
the complexity of ejection sequences, dual event recovery and radio communications in extremely re-
duced dimensions. Experience from this campaign will facilitate the team’s future deployable payloads
that will be able to incorporate our 1U module for a turn-key recovery solution. All of the recovery
electronics, hardware, and the Recovery Flight Computer (RFC) are housed in the CUBESat.
RASPix is a COTS particle detector for years and has ﬂight heritage aboard the ISS. The system
which we obtained, courtesy of a partnership with the Institute for Research in Schools, consists of
an FPGA capable of recording 15 exposures per minute via a single, 300µm thick silicon radiation
imaging detector. The system will be used for radiation monitoring: its 256x256 sensor captures the
trace of particles, each decaying and interacting with the silicon wafer according to speciﬁc patterns.
Electrons, being the least massive, leave long, curly, thin traces (visible in Figure 2.27, while protons
leave shorter, thicker traces. The counting and sorting of each type is handled by a Raspberry Pi B,
which we stripped of all unnecessary components to minimise failure points, reduce mass and reduce
the volume taken up by the board. The Pi logs radiation data, and creates a wireless network to
remotely initiate data capture from the launch rail. The detector is powered by a 3.7V, 750mAh LiPo
pouch-style battery.
Figure 2.27: Example of Data Outputted by the RasPIX - from P. Burian et al 2017 (JINST)
EMC was developed in house - it is based around an Arduino Nano and features a number of sensors
and peripherals. After breadboard tests, the design was moved to Altium Designer to formalise our
schematics (available in the appendix) into robust CAD models. Upon ordering the ﬁrst iteration of
our PCB, we spotted some non-critical faults. The second version of the PCB features a more robust
electronic design, thanks to wider traces, more eﬃcient routing and better aligned pins and silkscreen.
The unconventional shape of the board is due to the tight volumetric constraints in this section of the
payload. The sensors are lifted oﬀ the board, and are supported by a 3D printed “bridge”. This has the
beneﬁt of positioning the sensors up against the outer shell of the payload, improving the reliability of
our sensors by exposing them more directly to the atmosphere.
28
Since our team is relatively new and does not have any high-altitude ﬂight data from previous launches,
we have no data describing the cooling or heating of the internal volumes of our vehicles as they traverse
the stages of recovery. All components of the EMC and the descent computer were chosen to be able to
operate at -40°C, but The RASPix and Eggtimer batteries are based on Lithium Polymers, which are
notoriously sensitive to very low temperatures. Approximate calculations using a lumped capacitance
thermal model, and assuming the worst case scenario (150% faster descent speed, assuming a uniform
block of ABS, and ignoring the protection given by the nosecone structure) show that the temperature
of the payload, if exposed to a -40C air-stream at 60m/s, would reach equilibrium with the environment
in 30 seconds. A COTS 7.5W resistive patch heater was selected to work in conjunction with a simple
thermistor mounted to the battery pouches. -10°C was deemed an acceptable operational temperature
for the LiPo battery, and a PD controller was implemented on the Arduino Nano using Pulse Width
Modulation (PWM).
The heating patch requires a 12V power supply, so a XL6009 boost converter was chosen to upscale the
9V provided by a Lithium PP3 battery from Energizer, which will be discussed further in the Power
& Energy section. The electrical architecture of the CANSat is shown in 2.28
Figure 2.28: CANSat Electrical Architecture
Finally, the RFC, residing in the CUBE, handles all tasks concerning telemetry and recovery. It
is powered by a Teensy 4.0, chosen for its fast clock speed and compact size. This allows us to
run telemetry and recovery software tasks on separate virtual threads, isolating so that that if an
unexpected critical fault occurred in either one of them, the other would not be aﬀected. For example, if
a fault occurred in the GPS tracking, that would not stop the program ﬁring the chute from completing
its task.
Recovery Task:Altitude is tracked using a high precision barometer from Bosch (BMP388) which
oﬀers a ±8 Pascal uncertainty (approximately of±0.5 metres). The program starts oﬀ by saving a
reading for the ground pressure at the launch site. Then it begins comparing the previously recorded
altitude with the current altitude every 250ms. If the current altitude is found to be lower than the
previously recorded one for three times in a row, the RFC assumes the payload has begun descending
from apogee. It then starts monitoring when the altitude crosses the 500m above launch site level
mark, at which point it triggers a BJT transistor switch, closing the high-current Pyro channel feeding
29
an e-match, which will ignite the black powder held in the Tender Descender chamber, deploying the
main parachute.
Telemetry Task:GPS coordinates are received at a 1Hz frequency via serial communication from a
passive Ceramic Patch antenna facing upwards. The sentences are decoded from the NMEA standard
intoastringshowinglatitude, longitude, altitudeandnumberofsatellitesinview, andthentransmitted
via SPI to an RFM95W LoRa transceiver operating at 868MHz operating at a transmission power of
+20dBm (100mW is the legal maximum transmission power). Due to our team being scattered around
Europe to complete internships, it was not possible to conduct tests on the range of the system. Our
calculations (equations 2.9 and 2.10) show that at a range of 9km we can expect a -116dBm signal
at the ground station using the stock 2dBi RX/TX antennas and incorporating a 30dB loss due to
humidity, which is suﬃcient for the RFM95W receiver given its low-end sensitivity of -148dBm.
Pout[dBm] = Ptx +Gtx  Lf reespace  Lmisc +Grx (2.9)
where Lfree space [dBm] = 20log10(range [km]) + 20log10(frequency [MHz]) + 32:44 (2.10)
Finding the Payload is a major criterion for mission success. Our base station features an omni-
directional 3 dB-gain stub antenna for ground recovery, and a 8.5dB-gain, 6-element Yagi-Uda one, for
live telemetry. According to the same calculations, this setup triples our range.
The complete CUBESat architecture is shown in Figure 2.29
Figure 2.29: CUBESat Electrical Architecture
Power/Energy
In total, 4x 9V Energizer Lithium-Manganese Dioxide (Li/MnO2), PP3 format batteries were used
throughout the entire payload, powering the EMC board, the Heater, the Recovery Flight Computer,
and the EasyMini FC . These provide several advantages, being 1/3 of the mass of conventional alkaline
equivalents, but most importantly being designed with extreme operating conditions in mind. Unlike
LiPo’s, they are equipped with vents to prevent pressure buildup when exposed to lower atmospheric
pressures at apogee and are able to supply a constant current at lower temperatures. They support
30
a high burst discharge rate up to 1.5Amps, which is much more than the 500mA we found necessary
for the correct operation of our e-matches. In terms of expected ﬂight time, EMC’s ﬂight heritage
shows that it is able to continuously log data while surviving oﬀ a single of the above mentioned 9V
batteries for over 3 hours. Similarly, the RASPix has been tested in continuous logging mode for 57
minutes running oﬀ its 750mAh LiPo pack. Based on manufacturer speciﬁcations and data-sheets, the
Recovery Flight Computer’s (RFC) should consume no more than 300mA when running at 5V, so we
expect the battery to last over 3 hours on the 750mAh 9V battery. The team has not yet tested the
ﬁnal conﬁguration of the Recovery Flight Computer (RFC) and is eagerly awaiting to conﬁrm this. If
that proves not to be the case, another 9V battery will be added in parallel to double the battery life.
The EasyMini has also proved to reliably survive in ﬂight mode for over 1 hour on a 9V battery. The
other form of stored energy on board is in the form of 0.2 grams of black powder held in the combustion
chamber of the Tender Descender. In order to ﬁre, the system has to bearmed by manually ﬂipping
a slide switch on the main PCB (done on the launchpad through a small opening on the nose cone)
and thenactivated by either the RFC or the COTS EasyMini FC, both relying on barometric data
showing the vehicle hasBOTH started descendingAND crossed the 500m altitude mark.
Recovery
Dual event recovery is absolutely necessary for our payload. A drogue parachute enables a rapid but
controlled descent from apogee to 500 metres, while limiting the terminal velocity of the system such
that, at the instant of main chute deployment, the payload is not torn apart by excessive deceleration
loads. The main criteria for Descent solution selection are reliability, practicality, and the reduction
of deployment loads and landing energy. The payload relies on a 10” COTS Drogue Chute from Black
Cat Rocketry in conjunction with a 30” COTS Main Chute from Fruity Chutes.
Recovery Sequence:Upon separation from Darwin’s Lower Body, the drogue is immediately exposed
to the air-stream. It will tension a 1m long shock cord secured to the CUBESat bulkhead by an M4
eye nut. This line is equipped with a Tender Descender (TD), a COTS pyrotechnic device redundantly
controlled by our SRAD Recovery Flight Computer and COTS EasyMini Flight Computer. This line
is bifurcated above the TD, with a short connection to the main chute bag. When the 500m mark is
reached, the 0.2 gram black powder charge held in the Tender Descender is detonated by any 1 of 3
parallel e-matches, severing the line that previously transferred the drag force from the drogue to the
bulkhead. The drogue, initially loose, will start pulling away, engaging the other end of the bifurcated
line and pulling the Main Chute bag out of the Recovery Bay and into the free air-stream. The Bag
is connected to a loop sewn to the crown of the Main, so as the Drogue engages the line, the Bag
and Main are pulled apart, and the Main proceeds to inﬂate, transferring its drag force down through
another 1 metre line of shock cord, through a swivel and ﬁnally into a separate M6 eye nut secured to
the CUBESat Bulkhead. The sequence is shown in a simpliﬁed way in Figure 2.30:
31
Figure 2.30: Payload Deployment Sequence
Knowing the mass of the Payload+Nosecone assembly is 3kg, the system speciﬁcations (Table A.2),
and the terminal velocity formula (Equation 2.11), we can estimate the descent speed of the chutes,
which allows us to obtain shock loading ﬁgures to input into FEM simulations of the structure.
vt =
r 2mg
ACd
(2.11)
Fruity Chutes estimates the main chute should unfurl in 0.25 to 0.5 seconds. Using Formula 2.8, the
the shock loading can be calculated to be between 154 and 308 N. Results of FEM analysis on the
Payload Bulkhead subjected to a 600N are shown in Figure 2.31. It shows that the maximum stress
in the part is 7.73MPa, well below the yield stress of the carbon reinforced nylon material (60MPa
matrix, 540MPa ﬁber).
Figure 2.31: Payload Bulkhead Static Analysis - Main Chute Deployment
32
Table 2.4: Recovery system data of the Payload.
Assembly Parameter Value Units
Drogue (Supplied by Black Cat Rocketry)
Coeﬃcient of drag 0.7 -
Diameter 10 inch
Mass incl. hardware 21 g
Packing Volume 25 cm 3
Mass of black powder used 0.2 g
Deployment altitude 9000 m
Descent rate @ 9000m 57.3 m/s
Descent rate @ 500m 32.9 m/s
Main (Supplied by Fruity Chutes)
Chute coeﬃcient of drag 1.5 -
Diameter 30 inch
Mass incl. hardware 63 g
Packing Volume 190 cm 3
Mass of black powder used 0.2 g
Chute deployment altitude 500 m
Maximum stopping velocity 60 m/s
Chute descent rate 8.4 m/s
At sea level, the descent speed for Drogue and Main chutes can be calculated easily as 31.3 and 8.4 m/s
respectively. However, air density varies continuously and signiﬁcantly (by a factor of 3, depending on
atmospheric conditions) from the deployment altitude of 9000m to sea level. Thus, a Simulink model
accounting for the variation was created, showing the following results shown in Figure 2.32. The model
predicts the descent rate, showing both vertical speeds and altitude over time. The total descent time
of 232 seconds is easily found as the instant the altitude crosses the zero mark. Crucially, it does not
model horizontal wind loading, which aﬀects the horizontal speed and ultimately determines the ﬁnal
landing spot of the payload.
0 50 100 150 200 2500
0:2
0:4
0:6
0:8
1
104
Time [seconds]
Altitude [meters]
(a) Altitude vs Time
0 50 100 150 200 2500
20
40
60
Time [seconds]
Vertical Speed [meters per second]
(b) Vertical Speed vs Time
Figure 2.32: Results of the Simulink Model
33
Data Ouput and Dissemination of Results
The Payload will produce a great deal of valuable data from the sensors in the CANSat section. The 9
data streams from the EMC will be logged as a .csv ﬁle to a 16GB SD card, while the frames from the
radiation camera RASPix will be recorded on a separate card, within the Raspberry Pi OS. The data
collected by the payload will go on to enrich our data bank and enable us to compare ﬂight data and
environmental conditions from our previous and future launches, including the already-ﬂown mission
at Machrihanish AFB, and our team’s upcoming mission at the Shetland Islands, where our payload
will ﬂy once again aboard Darwin I, a subsonic version of the vehicle we are presenting at EuRoC. The
reason why it is even possible for the team to ﬂy such delicate and expensive hardware as the RASPix is
because of a collaboration with the Institute for Research in Schools, who kindly donated the device. In
exchange, Endeavour has planned and participated in a series of educational activities within the local
high-schools of Edinburgh covering topics such the importance of space exploration technology, the
fundamental physics of rocketry, and deep dives into how many of the sensors aboard Darwin actually
work. Following EuRoC, we are scheduled to conduct programming workshops where, using Python
together with popular libraries such as SciPy, Pandas and Matplotlib, students will manipulate, ﬁlter
and visualise real ﬂight data from our test campaigns and ﬂights.
2.6 Active Flight Control Subsystem
Airbrake Design Overview
Darwin II features the ability to apply active braking during its ascent through the use of a servo-
actuated, geared three-ﬁn airbrake system, the ﬁnal design for which is pictured in Figure 2.33. The
purpose of such a system is to allow Darwin II to achieve a greater level of accuracy in reaching its
target apogee: the logic is to design the rocket to overshoot the 9km target, then, during the ascent
phase, actively adjust the deployment of the airbrake ﬁns based on live data measurements, such
that suﬃcient drag is provided to allow the rocket to come to come to a stop as close to the target
height as possible. This idea, whilst simple in concept, proved to be a complex challenge to execute in
practice.
Figure 2.33: Render of the fully actuated airbrake system.
Safety
The Air-brakes are a critical feature of the rocket and its correct deployment (or lack thereof) can be the
diﬀerence between a successful launch or expensive and dangerous ﬁreworks. The ﬁrst design feature
that the need to have is to produce only axial forces; any other asymmetry could aﬀect the rocket
trajectory, deviating it from its parabolic path and potentially going sideways with the consequent
risk. Thus, the system need to be completely symmetrical in the axial direction, both in design and
34
actuation. If one ﬂap deploys sooner than the other, it will create a lateral force, deviating the rocket
from its trajectory and making it going sideways. In order to achieve this, the 3 ﬂaps are completely
identical and all are actuated by the same central gear-rack system attached to the servo.
In order to ensure that the air brakes retract during failure mode, the system was originally planned to
have three extension springsto retract upon failure. However, with issuesﬁtting them into the assembly
alternative options were explored. Spiral torsion springs were considered, but after contacting various
spring manufacturers, the combination of size, force and rotational angle made this impossible. It
was therefore decided that the failure mode retraction would be accomplished through a secondary
redundant control system, which would control the servo to fully retract the brakes if the primary
control system was lost.
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
Figure 2.34: Airbrake system FEA key results: (a)
Finally, It is necessary to ensure that the ﬂaps stiﬀ enough for the application and the they do not
jam and get stuck due to external loading. The later problem was solved by adding a layer of HDPE
between the laser cut layers of aluminum and the ﬂap. Due to it lubricant properties and low density
the HDPE is perfect for this application. To ensure suﬃcient stiﬀness and structural integrity, several
FEA using ANSIS and analytical calculation were made. The maximum deployment velocity of the
Airbrakes is 200m/s, in order to avoid transonic eﬀects. Thus we can calculate the maximum expected
load for the biggest possible length (biggest area). The biggest uncertainty with this approach is that
it is diﬃcult to estimate the drag coeﬃcient of a ﬂap perpendicular to the ﬂow attached to a surface.
The literature estimates a Cd or around 1.1-1.2, but the load calculation a Cd of 1.6 was using, give a
load per ﬂap of 133N/ﬂap. The results of this FEA analyses can be seen in ﬁgure 2.34. The maximum
stress, as one intuitively guesses, is at the root of the ﬂap. This is 11.3 MPa well below the 250
MPa of the yield stress of the aluminium 6086-T6 used, given a safety factor of around 23. Thus the
second unknown to ask if the total deﬂection and stiﬀness of the ﬂap. The analysis showed that only
a maximal deﬂection of 0.1mm is expected in the worst case scenario. Then, it is safe to conclude that
35
the stack is structurally strong and stiﬀ enough for this application, and the biggest focus should be
on the control system and characterization of the system.
Active Control
Once the air brake design has been validated and there is conﬁdence its mechanical integrity, the
biggest problem to solve is how to control them. As mention previously the, the ﬂaps are actuated by
a gear-rack system controlled by a servo motor, thus, the output of our active control will be the angle
of rotation of the servo. Since we now the length and number of teeth of the rack, it is easily shown
that it is necessary 100 degrees of rotation to fully deploy the ﬂaps.
One option to control the rotation of the serve would be estimate the drag force of the ﬂaps using
equation 2.3, but due to the uncertainties of drag coeﬃcient this method is not reliable. Instead a
combination of a model predictive and PID control have been used: First the ideal trajectory has
been calculated using a 6-DOF model implemented in Simulink, predicting an apogee of 9Km, then
a critically damped PID controller has been implemented into the FC. This critically damped PID
control (not overshoot) compared the current velocity, acceleration and altitude (system inputs) with
the previously calculated ideal path, then using a tabulate servo angle-drag table, it operated the ﬂaps.
So instead of being calculating every time step the whole trajectory, which will be very computationally
expensive, the system is just compared the inputs with the ideal inputs, then actuated the servo to
change the inputs and repeated until the ideal trajectory is reached.
36
3. Mission Concept of Operations Overview
For a nominal launch, the vehicle must be initialised successfully through the standard e-match pro-
cedure, launch with no structural failure, transmit data live to ground station, achieve apogee of 9 km
exactly with payload and drogue chute deployment occurring, and main chute deployment at 500 m.
Ideally both the vehicle and the payload is recovered successfully with GPS coordinates transmitting
from both. See Figure 3.1 for more information on each phase of the rocket.
Figure 3.1: Rocket’s stages
Before arriving at the launch pad, the vehicle and the payload should be fully assembled and motor
loaded. While the structures, recovery, and payload teams work to prepare the vehicle and payload
on the launch rail, avionics and software have to set the sensor ‘initial’ values for the launch area into
the ﬂight computer (on both vehicle and payload) for accurate measurements during ﬂight. Once the
structure is on the launch rail and sensors are calibrated, the initialisation sequence of the FC logic
can be initiated on ground control with the software & avionics team. The GPS from both vehicle and
payload should start transmitting. They will also ensure that sensors are collecting measurements and
writing to the SD card with no issues, thus entering the armed state.
The motor should be ignited once everyone has cleared the launch pad. If the launch is successful,
the rocket should enter the powered ascent phase where the motor propellant is burned. This is when
the vehicle is under the highest acceleration and should ﬂy without sustaining damage. The payload
should begin collecting and logging data, although no meaningful data is expected as it is housed
inside the nose cone. The FC logic should enter the powered ascent or ‘Boosting phase’ when the
measured acceleration is positive (upwards). The Kalman ﬁlter should start ﬁltering measurements
for noise reduction and the FC boosting phase timer will be constantly extended until acceleration
starts decreasing. This should signal the FC that the vehicle has entered the motor burnout phase, or
‘Coasting phase’. The motor propellant has been exhausted and the FC should deploy the airbrake to
adjust the projected apogee to exactly 9 km. The airbrake should operate with no failure and should
generate enough drag to slow the rocket down for the target apogee along with the controller, which
will be in charge of operate the Air brakes base on previous ground simulation and tabulated values.
Alongside the controller, the FC should continue to collect, ﬁlter, and log data.
When the apogee is reached, the FC should enter ‘DrogueDeployed State’ by satisfying two of three
conditions: 1. velocity passed a minimum threshold, 2. altitude starts dropping, or 3. pressure
increases. During this state, the airbrake should be retracted and the recovery phase should begin.
The recovery charges (CO2 canisters) should be deployed with a digital signal from the FC activating
the e-matches, causing the shear pins to shear oﬀ and the nose cone, coupled with the payload, is
separated from the rest of the vehicle. This ejects the drogue chute and deploys it as well.
The separated nose cone and payload should start a diﬀerent descent path down compared to the
vehicle. The drogue chute should deploy automatically just after ejection and the sensor cluster in the
CanSat should collect and log actual environmental data. The FC on the payload should also calculate
37
its altitude for deployment of the main chute and be transmitting GPS data to the ground station.
During this face the Tender Descender will be connected to the drogue chute, carrying the load.
Meanwhile the vehicle should be coasting with the drogue chute deployed. The FC should be constantly
measuring and comparing the altitude measurement to the deﬁned main chute deployment altitude
of 500 m. If the altitude is equal or below the stored value or if the time after drogue deployment
surpasses the pre-set time limit of 315 sec, then the main chute should automatically deploy through
the same separation as the drogue chute. The FC will activate the e-matched of the Tender Descender,
breaking the plastic pin and releasing the main chute. After the main chute deploys, the FC enters
‘MainDeployed State’ with no additional recovery events in the vehicle. The vehicle will coast down
until it reaches ground, and the FC should register touchdown when pressure and altitude is constant,
and velocity is close to zero.
Throughout the diﬀerent phases, the FC should be collecting and logging data onto the SD card on
board, and transmit data to ground control. While the data collected after landing is irrelevant, the
avionics bay should be functional as the most important data transmitted to the ground station after
landing is the GPS coordinate for recovery. The avionics power source should last for 1.8 hours.
See Figure 2.10 for simulated ﬂight trajectory, vertical velocity, acceleration, and stability of the vehicle
during ﬂight.
See Figure 2.2 for the thrust curve of our primary motor selection Cesaroni O3400 and secondary
selection N5800.
Figure 3.2: Altitude vs Time
38
Figure 3.3: Speed vs Time
39
4. Conclusions and Outlook
We have successfully designed a vehicle with a deployable payload capable of surviving travel in the
supersonic regime, control its apogee, transmit data real-time, and be recovered with minimal damage
to vehicle and payload. We have also design and implemented an SRAD FC using Rust, and created
simulation and numerical models in MATLAB and Simulink of the rocket, trajectory and expected
loads. This is a huge milestone for the team, and it will the foundation for future projects.
Endeavour has accomplished major tasks through the pandemic. We have successfully designed and
manufactured a new rocket from scratch when we had to do most of our work online and had restric-
tions on number of people that were allowed to meet. Even thought it is our ﬁrst launch, we have
implemented advanced concepts such as the airbrakes, advanced additive manufacturing technique,
and so on to Darwin II. Furthermore, we will be able to use the data collected from EuRoC for an out-
reach workshop in the local high school. Overall, this year has been successful in giving students and
younger pupils more experience in aerospace and STEM. This would not have been possible without
the dedication from the team members.
While it has been a productive year, there were some aspects that did not go as well. As a young
team, we were inexperienced in some rocketry-speciﬁc aspects and had to go through many iterations
before we could ﬁnalise the design. As a result, manufacturing and testing was delayed. We didn’t
realise there was a gap between the engineering we’ve learned in university and the detail required for
a good rocket design. In addition, connections to supports and advice had to be an on-going task as
we were not as well-known as other student teams. However, as the years go by and the more events
and launches endeavour participates in, the more well-connected the team will be.
We’ve learned a lot of lessons by building Darwin II. We now know how to construct a more realistic
timeline as we understand the eﬀects of lead times of manufacturing, iterations, and testing. In
particular, we realised that PCB requires multiple iterations (starting from a breadboard) and smaller
testing in between to successfully complete the avionics system and test it with recovery and rest of
the hardware. In addition, we have gained more experience in utilising more materials and processes
such as HDPE, wood, continuous ﬁbre additive manufacturing, and utilising header pins that allows
easier removal of PCB components. We’ve also learned the importance of team identity and culture
in increasing productivity. Because of COVID-19, team socials had to be something that needed to
be organised instead of something that naturally happens after a meeting. These socials helped team
members to get to know each other and increased productivity and dedication.
For next year, we would like to dedicate more time in the logistics of designing a rocket. Creating a
feasible timeline and altering it as necessary, updating databases of parts more rigorously, and ensure
that handovers are done more systematically to ensure that the future years that join endeavour do
not have to re-invent the wheel. We would also focus more on social media promotion of our work
for better documentation and publicity. In the technical aspect of things, we would like to allow more
time to test and do multiple iterations of the rocket. This will create a more robust and well thought
out rocket. Even more quantitative and qualitative testing will be planned and carried out, and we’ll
take the lesson learnt to improve upon each iteration. In a similar argument, more simulations is
something that we will aim for for next year. It will help us predict the behaviour of the rocket where
testing cannot show us and ensure that the rocket will be safe. In addition, it will give endeavour more
knowledge in FEA and CFD that can be used for years to come.
For next year’s rocket, Darwin III, we would like to improve upon the concepts that we have imple-
mented in Darwin II. A more advanced airbrake control system to improve the controller response
and better manipulate the apogee, better bonding between composites and metal components, more
in-house composite manufacturing, and advanced data communication between the ﬂight computer
and the ground station such as video live streams of ﬂight footage.
40
A. System Data
Table A.1: Structural system data of Darwin II.
Parameter Value Units
Length 2.74 m
Vehicle & payload mass with propellant 34.5 kg
Propellant mass 10.93 kg
Payload mass 2.4 kg
Number of stages 1 -
Inner diameter 152.4 mm
Outer diameter 156.4 mm
Number of ﬁns 3 -
Fin span 190 mm
Fin root length 360 mm
Fin tip length 70 mm
Target apogee 9000 m
Maximum velocity 575 m/s
Maximum acceleration 141 m/s 2
Flight duration 500 s
Motor burn time 6.4 s
Time from launch to apogee 40 s
41
Table A.2: Recovery system data of Darwin II.
Assembly Parameter Value Units
Drogue
Coeﬃcient of drag 1.6 -
Diameter 24 inch
Mass of CO2 separation charge 23 g
Mass of black powder used 0.24 g
Deployment altitude 9000 m
Descent rate 28 m/s
Main
Chute coeﬃcient of drag 2.2 -
Diameter 96 inch
Mass of CO2 separation charge 0 g
Mass of black powder used 0.2 g
Chute deployment altitude 500 m
Chute descent rate 6 m/s
Table A.3: Telemetry system data of Darwin II.
Assembly Parameter Value Units
Vehicle
Power duration 1.8 hours
Communication frequency 433 MHz
Output power (max.) 100 mW
Communication range (w/ Yagi RX) 20000 m
Payload
Power duration >1 hour
Communication frequency 868 MHz
Output power 100 mW
Communication range (w/ Yagi RX) 15000 m
Ground station
Power duration >2 hours
Transceiver sensitivity (max.) -120 dBm
Communication range (uni-directional) 20000 m
Communication range (omni-directional) 3000 m
42
B. Detailed Test Reports
B.1 Recovery testing
TO BE CONDUCTED SHORTLY
43
B.2 SRAD propulsion system testing
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
44
B.3 SRAD pressure system testing
TO BE CONDUCTED SHORTLY
45
B.4 SRAD Flight computer testing
B.4.1 GPS Module Testing
Testing of the GPS module ensures that we can, without relying on the COTS FC, perform a successful
recovery of the rocket once it has completed its ﬂight.
To do so, the following tests were conducted:
Initial Breadboard Test:
This test comprised of building up the GPS circuit on a breadboard, supplying the BigRedBee with its
required 5V power supply. Thereafter it could be moved independently around a local park in order
to gauge the following:
• Whether it could achieve a ﬁrm satellite connection
• If it could sustain this connection
• How accurately it could pinpoint its location
After moving the setup around for roughly 1 hour, the setup was powered oﬀ and the results checked
through a plug-in on Google Maps.
The results of the test indicated that although the module was slow to establish a satellite link, once it
did it never disconnected. It should be noted that this was on a clear day with minimal cloud cover and
few natural or man-made obstructions such as trees or buildings. As well as this, the data gathered
was plotted and accurately portrayed the route taken during the testing period.
The test was deemed successful and the next stage could be explored.
First PCB Implemented Test:
After the success of the ﬁrst breadboard test, the GPS module was then connected to the PCB designed
to represent its circuit, the telemetry board. Connecting this up to the main controller board, the data
from the GPS would be transmitted to our micro-controller and thereafter displayed on its serial
monitor on a computer. This would allow us to observe if it satisﬁed the conditions outlined in the
previous test.
Powering on the controller board and placing the setup next to an open window, the output from the
micro-controller was observed.
The results indicated that the module now struggled to establish a connection, and when it did it
quickly lost it. This was most likely a result of a lack of clear line-of-sight due to obstructions and
cloud cover.
This test was repeated many times over the course of several weeks, with varying but unsatisfying
results.
Testing Summary:
Over the course of testing the BigRedBee GPS module, the following observations were notewor-
thy:
• The module struggled with obtaining a satellite lock on cloudy days or when in the presence of
obstructions
46
• When neither of these were hindrances were present, it still took longer than was permissible to
establish a connection
• The data transmission to the micro-controller bottle-necked readings from other components as
it transmits at only 1Hz
As a result of these ﬁndings, it was decided that a new module would be implemented to replace the
BigRedBee. The module chosen was an Adafruit Ultimate GPS Breakout. It was chosen because it
operated on the same transmission protocol as the BigRedBee, used the same pins to communicate
with the controller board, had a faster transmission rate of 10Hz, and was recommended by our Payload
sub-team.
Once acquired, it was subjected to the same tests as the previous module and proved to be faster at
acquiring satellite connection, even indoors.
Therefore, this will be the module implemented in the ﬁnal iteration of our FC PCB’s.
B.4.2 Battery Testing
In order to guarantee suﬃcient ﬂight time for the FC, testing how long the batteries would take to
discharge was essential. Given that the threshold for full operation is 5V, this meant we were testing
a discharge range of 2.4V. This threshold is deﬁned by the components that operate on a 5V supply,
e.g.: the Teensy micro-controller. If the battery’s voltage drops below 5V, these components will no
longer be able to operate at full functionality or in some cases, they won’t operate at all.
To conﬁrm how long our FC would function fully for, the following tests were conducted:
Controller Board Drain Test:
The ﬁrst board to test was the controller board. This contains components such as the IMU’s, barom-
eters, and micro-controller. It is a relatively low impact load on the battery supply as all of the
components have a current draw in the order of 10’s of microamps up to a few milliamps.
A simple test setup consisting of an Arduino Uno and a potential divider breadboard circuit was used
to monitor the voltage supplied to the PCB by the battery. The Adruino acted as an analogue voltage
sensor, and the potential divider stepped down the voltage to within the Arduino’s voltage range of
0-5V.
The board was then connected to the 7.4V battery and powered on. The Arduino’s output was
conﬁrmed to be approximately 3.7V (which correlated to 7.4V before it was stepped down), and the
setup was then left to run. It should be noted that the script controlling the voltage measurement
printed the value every second, with the number of elapsed seconds displayed too.
After roughly 2.5 hours, the battery’s voltage had dropped by only 0.44V, so the setup was powered
down and disconnected as this showed ample running time.
The test was deemed successful and the next stage could be explored.
Testing Summary:
At the time of writing, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
As it stands, the controller board can operate on battery supply for ample time to encompass standby
on the launch pad, ﬂight, and recovery.
Going forward, the telemetry and peripheral board, which contain the components that draw the most
current and therefore use the most power, will be subjected to a battery drain test.
47
B.4.3 Barometer and Temperature Testing
A brief conﬁrmation of the sensor module’s temperature stimulus response had been conducted by
simply heating the air around the module and observing the temperature rise in the data output. For
the pressure, no testing has been conducted thus far.
At the time of writing however, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
B.4.4 IMU Testing
As with the previous section, this sensor module’s stimulus response was tested initially by rotating
the board on diﬀerent axes whilst observing the output. The response was registered, but further
thorough testing needs to be conducted to gauge accuracy.
At the time of writing however, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
B.4.5 RF Testing
Reading data successfully is one thing, but being able to observe these readings is even more so. As a
result, it was vital to ensure that our transmission system would be suﬃcient when our rocket reached
apogee. Initially, the idea was to use an ampliﬁer on the telemetry board to boost the transceiver’s sig-
nal to ground, but this proved to be a bad implementation as it would attenuate our signal signiﬁcantly.
As a result, we decided to implement a more sensitive ground station receiver instead.
ThismeanttestinghowwellourFCandgroundstationcommunicatedatincreasinglyfurtherdistances.
Since our system now consists of two diﬀerent types of antennas, uni-directional and omni-directional,
these had to both be tested.
The following were tests conducted on these antennas:
Omni-directional Short Range RF Test:
To begin with, a simple breadboard implementation of the transceiver for our FC was connected
alongside our ground station breadboard setup; both programmed on an Arduino Uno. They were
then placed side-by-side, at a distance of a few inches, and the FC transceiver was set to transmit a
simple data packet.
This proved successful and there were no issues reading the packet sent by the FC transceiver.
This meant we could increase the testing distance.
Omni-directional Mid Range RF Test:
Thereafter, the setup was taken outside where they were placed at each end of a street approximately
300m in length.
The same data packet transmission was sent from the FC transceiver and it was received successfully
by the ground station transceiver.
Now the setup was ready for a long distance test.
Omni-directional Long Range RF Test:
Lastly, the same setup was taken to two local high points in the city, where the transceivers would
be above most obstructions with clear line-of-sight of one another. These points where approximately
2.7km apart.
48
Following the same procedure, data was successfully transmitted across this distance with very few
disruptions to the data stream.
The testing of the transceivers with the omni-directional antennas was deemed a success and the
uni-directional antennas could now be tested.
Testing Summary:
At the time of writing, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
However, we have conﬁrmed that the omni-directional antenna functions appropriately and can be
used for recovery in the ﬁnal stages on the rockets descent.
Going forward, the uni-directional YAGI antenna will be tested under similar conditions to those
outlined above. Thereafter, both antennas will be connected simultaneously to the ground station and
tested in parallel with the Payload system.
B.4.6 Output Testing
The main controller board contains outputs that control other aspects of the rocket, i.e.: the air-brake
system and the recovery initialisation. As a result, it is vital to ensure that these events are triggered
appropriately.
In order to conﬁrm this, the following tests were conducted:
Servo Motor Test:
The servo motor controls the extension of the air-brake blades in order to control the speed of the
rocket in its cruising state. This means that the servo needs to rotate when supplied a signal from the
micro-controller.
In order to test this, a simple script was written on an Arduino to open and close the air-brakes by
rotating the servo between two limits. This had proved troublesome at ﬁrst, but was easily remedied
when the Arduino and the servo were connected to the same ground.
After this, it was just a matter of ﬁnding appropriate limits for the servo so that it will not stall or
extend too far during nominal operation.
This test was deemed successful and so the next stage would be to test it directly from the controller
board.
At the time of writing however, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
E-match Ignition Test:
In order to deploy the parachutes to slow the descent of the rocket after it has achieved its apogee
goal and begins its descent back to ground, e-matches are used to ignite a charge that will eject them
from the rocket body. These e-matches require an electrical current in order to ignite. This therefore,
needed to be tested.
In order to do this, initially, the e-matches were simply connected to a power supply and supplied with
a current. This proved successful and they ignited without issue.
The next stage of testing would be to ignite them via the main FC controller board.
At the time of writing however, not all of the tests could be completed for this section.
49
B.4.7 Miscellaneous Testing
Iteration testing
When each iteration of the FC PCB’s arrived, they needed to be tested thoroughly to ensure all
electrical connections and supplies were correct in order for the FC to operate fully.
The electrical architecture has undergone 3 versions thus far, with a 4th version underway for the
telemetry board. The main points to note from testing these iterations is as follows:
Version 1:
• Incorrectly placed capacitor creating short circuit
• Surface mount components too small to solder adequately
• Bluetooth breakout board no longer required
• Switch circuit resistor incorrectly connected
• Insuﬃcient oﬀ-sheet connectors
• No 5V supply on the telemetry board
Version 2:
• Incorrect power supply for Teensy micro-controller
• Switch circuit transistor drew too much
• Antenna ampliﬁer no longer required
• Servo output required an empty pin for PWM control
• Some diodes redundant
Version 3:
• Old GPS module (BigRedBee) to be replaced by Adafruit module
• Eggtimer COTS to be implemented
B.4.8 Future Tests:
Having been unable to complete all the necessary tests at the time of this submission, the following is
a summary of what still needs to be tested before the competition:
• Telemetry and peripheral PCB battery drain test
• Pressure, temperature, and IMU data variation
• Uni-directional YAGI antenna range test tests
• E-match ignition PCB test
• Servo control PCB test
50
C. Hazard Analysis Report
Propellant Hazard Analysis
The most dangerous of all the hazardous material in the rocket is the motor propellant. It is a highly
explosive material and must be treated with extreme care. As a COTS solid motor team, EuRoC will
be handling and transporting the motor to the competition. We will receive the motor on the launch
date and will prepare accordingly.
The motor will not be taken out of its packaging until we are absolutely sure that the vehicle is ready to
go on the launch pad and the assembly checklist has been completed. All personnel handling the motor
will be wearing safety goggle and the motor will be assembled horizontally to prevent any falls. Mem-
bers assembling the motor will be extremely familiar and will follow the motor installation procedure
and checklist very closely to ensure that the motor is secured. The vehicle will then be transported
to the launch pad very carefully. Tasks that has to be done on the launch pad will be minimised and
done so in a gentle manner for safety. If the launch is unsuccessful, the members will follow the mishap
launch checklist to disassemble the motor assembly and deactivate it accordingly if deemed to be safe.
Separation Charge (CO2 Canister and Black powder) Hazard Analysis
While vital for recovery, CO2 canisters and black powder can be dangerous if handled incorrectly.
Our main separation charges are the CO2 canisters, one main and one redundant. These require
a small amount of black powder and an e-match to pressurise and separate the vehicle. Our main
chute deployment system, the tender descender, also requires a small amount of black powder to
actuate. Recovery testing will allow us to know the exact amount of black powder we need, and
precise measurement will ensure that we use the minimum that we need for safety and eﬃciency.
Both the black powder and the CO2 canisters will be available through the EuRoC pyrotechnical shop
and will be transported and handled correctly until the launch date.
Once the black powder and CO2 canisters are in our possession, we would have to ensure that it is
handled safely. All members that will handle black powder will be wearing gloves and all members
working in the recovery assembly will be wearing safety goggles. No naked ﬂames or sparks will be
near the black powder to prevent any accidental ignition.
51
D. Risk Assessment
Table D.1: Risk assessment matrix of Darwin II.
Failure mode Mission PhaseFailureprobabilityMishapseverityCriticalityranking Comment and justiﬁcation
Insuﬃcient pressurisationduring recovery Apogee 1 3 3 Check seal during assemblyand apply additional adhesives as needed
Shear pins not breakingApogee 1 3 3 Design according to rocketry standardTest by previous designers
Payload detached fromnose cone after separationApogee andshortly after1 3 3 Apply adhesives during ﬁnal assembly
Detachment of metal tipof nose cone All 1 1 1 Minor eﬀect on aerodynamic performance
Drogue chute deployment failureApogee 2 3 6 Receive advice from expert rocketeer in UKin folding and storage of drogue chute
Battery disconnected during ﬂightAll 1 3 3 Tape/hot glue on connection
Connection from vehicle/payloadto ground control lost All 2 3 6 All members focused on tracking vehiclefor yagi direction with binoculars
Avionics fuselage connectionfailure during ﬂight All 1 2 2 Fuselage is non-structural component of section& components are securely attached
Airbrake gear failure(seizing/breaking) Motor burnoutto apogee 2 1 2 Airbrake actuates radially and therefore noaerodynamic force will be applied if failed
Detachment of motor sleevefrom motor bulkhead All 2 2 4 Redesign motor bulkhead to increaseinterference between bulkhead and motor sleeve
Fin connection failure All 2 3 6 Increased attachment area& additional GFRP ﬁllet on ﬁn
Leading and trailing edgefalling out All 2 1 2 Minor performance deterioration
Aft cone failuredue to motor thrustPowered ascent2 3 6 Additional metal reinforcementon area above motor thrust ring
Electronics bay rods bucklingPowered ascent1 3 3 Rod made from steel& increased thicknessAnalytical and numerical analysis
Motor sleeve bucklingPowered ascent1 3 3 Increased thickness of the sleeve& Load carried also by fuselage and motor bulkhead
Airframe buckling Powered ascent1 3 3 Increased of the wall thickness and general strength
Shearing of airframe joint boltsAll 1 3 3 Increased number of bolts& Glued connections
Failure of joints under bendingPowered ascent1 3 3 At least one body diameter in the interfaces
Rocket becomes unstable at supersonic velocitiesPowered ascent1 3 3 OpenRocket, RasAero and Star CCM+ analysis
Motor failed ignition Launch 2 2 4 Checklist and inspection of mortor and e-matches
Entanglement of the parachutesAll 1 3 3 Proper folding of the parachutes
Shock cord breaking Recovery 1 3 3 Analytical calculation and safety factor when selecting the diameter
Tender descender not working properlyRecovery 2 3 6 Use of the device according to manufacture
Run out of battery All 1 2 2 Analytical analysis of the battery durationPlus 1h of total battery
Poor wire connection All 1 3 3 Use of block terminal to secure the wiresThoroughly test of the wires connection prior to launch
Improper alignment of the ﬁnsPowered ascent2 2 4 Correct assembly of the ﬁnsAligment with laser system
Radio frequency interferenceRecovery 2 2 4 Two body diameters of RF transparency around the emittersUse of diﬀerent frequencyUse of Yagi and onmidirectional antennas in ground station
52
E. Checklists & Procedures
E.1 Shipment & Edinburgh departure
Shipment checklist:
• Toolbox
– Screwdriver, allen key, spanners
– Nippers, tweezers, pliers
– Soldering iron, solder, soldering tape, solder sucker, wire
– Epoxy, superglue, masking tape, duct tape, hot glue
– Knife, scissors
– Dremel, Dremel bits
– Electrical adapters
• Fasteners
– Avionics Bay:
∗ 11x M3’s for PCB mounting
∗ 7x M2’s for securing SD card reader and barometers
∗ 12x M3’s for securing IMU’s
∗ 4x M3’s for securing COTS FC
∗ 8x M2.5’s for securing Raspberry Pi Zero’s
∗ 2x M2.5’s for securing GPS module
∗ 4x M2.5’s fr mounting Raspberry Pi camera module
∗ 4x M3’s for mounting the antenna support
• Main vehicle
– Nose Cone
– Nose cone tip
– Shear pins
– Electronics bay assembly and recovery bay
– Lower body fuselage
– Motor bulkhead
– Motor sleeve
– Aft cone
• Recovery system
– Main Parachute
– Drogue Parachute
– Tinder Rocketry RAPTOR CO2 Ejection System, 2x
– Rocketman Shock Cord
– 3 Rocketman Y-harness
53
– 2 Eye Bolt M8 x 18mm
– 25 x 0.3m E-match
– 2 23g CO2 Canister
– Fruity Chutes L2 Recovery Tether
• Aerials
• Banner (pop up and stand)
• Technical poster
• PPE Boots & goggles
• Binoculars
• Spare 3D print parts and sensors
Edinburgh departure:
• First-aid kit
• Masks
• Hard copy of documents
– Technical report
– Checklist & procedures
– Other logistics related documents
• Avionics & ground control
– Completed avionics bay and ground control
∗ 3 PCB’s
∗ 3 Batteries
∗ COTS ﬂight computer
∗ Antennas
∗ SD card
∗ Independent camera module
– Cables for antenna (uFL to SMA), inter-PCB connection (jumpers), and micro-controller
(USB-A to micro-USB)
– Battery charger
– SD card reader
• Payload
– CanSat
– CubeSat
– Batteries
– COTS ﬂight computer
– Antennas
– Recovery system
– Fasteners
54
E.2 Pre-launch assembly checklist & procedure
E.2.1 Lower section
• Motor sleeve attached
• Fin attachment bonded
• Fin inserted
– Fin edges inserted and attached
• Aft cone ring interested
• Full lower assembly glued and assembled
• Motor inserted
• Aft. bolted to the lower assembly
• Motor bolted to motor bulkhead
• motor bulkhead attached to lower assembly fuselage
E.2.2 Airbrake
• Rack & gear meshed and secured
• Check correct actuation of the ﬁns
• Check correct and successful actuation of the servo
• Avionics rod secured to the motor bulkhead
E.2.3 Avionics bay
Assembly procedure:
1.
Position and secure the rod clasps at the right location on the rods with M3 screws. Slide into
airbrake and recovery bulkhead assembly and secure with M6 nuts.
55
2.
Mount cross-rods and PCB assemblies; including battery, camera and GPS mounts, and align
with cross rods using hole positions. Then, attach assembly to the 3 structural rods via the
pre-positioned clamps.
3.
 Position the 3 outer “skin” sections and attach to recovery bulkhead assembly and airbrakes
via. 6x M3 bolts at top and bottom.
Checklist:
• recovery bulkhead is assembled
• Collar secured
• PCB secured
• PCB is working
• Connections between boards and to e-match and servo outputs
• Side panel attached
E.2.4 Recovery section - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST & PROCE-
DURE
Hardware assembly procedure:
56
1.
Assemble recovery bulkhead by securing camera, canisters and eyebolt. Slide bulkhead onto
electronics bay rods and secure with nuts.
2.
Connect shock cord to eyebolt. Position and secure coupling tube and recovery bay body tube.
Insert and organise parachutes and cords.
Recovery procedure: linking parachutes
Checklist:
• try to see if recovery section is sealed by pushing air into it or something through one shear pin
hole?
• all recovery connections are secure
• no tangles in shock cords
• black powder in tender descender and CO2 canister
• avionics rod secured
57
E.2.5 Nose cone - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST
Assembly procedure
1.
Secure metal tip using threaded end and M10 nut.
2.
Apply adhesive to payload spring plate and payload rail guides, and position in nose cone.
58
3.
Compress spring by inserting payload and payload separator plate.
checklist
• Payload secured to nose cone
• Tip secured
Payload - INCOMPLETE CHECKLIST
• Cube and Can connected
• recovery all inside
• sensors are on and connected
E.2.6 Entirevehiclewithoutmotor-INCOMPLETECHECKLIST
Assembly procedure:
59
1.
Slide nose cone assembly over upper coupler tube and secure in place with shear pins.
Checklist:
• Shear pins inserted
E.3 Launch day
E.3.1 Motor installation Procedure
1.
Slide the motor into the motor sleeve assembly.
60
2.
Slide on aft cone and align tab on aft cone with tab on ﬁn attachment.
3.
Insert ﬁns into aligned tabs and secure with M5 bolts and nuts.
4.
Slide in the assembly from step 4 to lower body fuselage.
61
5.
Insert motor bulkhead on top and secure with 6 M3 screws and screw in motor from top with
3/8x1/2 bolt.
E.3.2 Launch checklist
• sensor calibration
• avionics initialisation
• ﬁlming setup for recording & recovery
E.3.3 motor mishap disassembly PROCEDURE & CHECKLIST
• Remove rocket from the launch pad
• Cut current from e-matches Remove e-matches and any other activation device
• Move rocket to a safe working location
• Inspect the motor
E.3.4 motor disassembly after recovery PROCEDURE
• Remove Avionics bay from Airbrakes
• Unscrew rods from motor bulkhead
• Remove airbrakes
• Remove motor retention bolt
• Remove Aft cone bolts
• Slide out motor
62
F. Engineering Drawings
A
A
 117.2 
 98 
 7° 
 121 
 15 
SECTION A-A
PLAN
A
A
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
E4, F2 A Angle changed the angle from 9 to 7 degres
Outer diameters changed from 128 to 121 mm 10/05/2021 YES
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.1
   ANGULAR: +/- 0.5°
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3ALUMINIU 6082-T6
WEIGHT: 
ZSOLT CSONKA
JAMIE WHITE 19/05/21
22/04/21
D2-101
AFT CONE CAP
A
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
ALEJANDRO VARGAS 09/05/21
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
63
 70.00 
 216.00 
 308.00 
 26.00 
 92.00 
 29.9° 
 10.00 
 5.00 
 8.00 
 3X 90.00 
 11.30 
TYP 4 PLCS
A
 5.00 
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
ALEX STEVENSON
stru-fin_D2_102
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
64
 20.00 
 5.00 
 10.00 
 11.84 
 1.70 
 9.00° 
 180.16 
 20.00  160.16 
 5.00 
 10.00 
 5.00 
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
CHECKED
SIZE
APPLICATION
TITLE:
PROPRIETARY AND CONFIDENTIAL
INTERPRET GEOMETRIC
TOLERANCING PER:
Q.A.
BCM
FINISH
AFT CONE CONNECTOR
DWG.  NO.
DATE
USED ON A
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILIMMITERS
TOLERANCES: 0.125MM
FRACTIONAL
ANGULAR: MACH      BEND 
TWO PLACE DECIMAL    
THREE PLACE DECIMAL  
ANEXT ASSY
MATERIAL
NAME
REV
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING SCALE: 1:1
D2-103
ENG APPR.
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THIS
DRAWING IS THE SOLE PROPERTY OF
ENDEAVOUR. ANY 
REPRODUCTION IN PART OR AS A WHOLE
WITHOUT THE WRITTEN PERMISSION OF
ENDEAVOUR IS 
PROHIBITED.
THORNEL MAT VMA 
COMMENTS:
DRAWN
MFG APPR.
SHEET 1 OF 1
2 1
A
B
A
B
12
ENDEAVOUR
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
65
A
B
 300.00 
 25.40 
 20.00  90.00  10.00 
 20.00 
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 5
 99.00 
 102.00 
 5.00 
 R76.20 
 120° 
 2.50 
 90° 
DETAIL B
SCALE 1 : 1
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:10 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3
WEIGHT: 
main part of fin attachment_D2_104
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
66
 120° TYP 
AA
B
TOP
A
A
B1
C1
B2
B3
A6
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
X
Y
00
 99.0 
+
-
0.0
0.5 
 152.4 
-
-
0.0
0.1 (f7) 
 2.0 
 10.0 
 16.4 
 43.7 
 (27.3) 
 R5.0  
 146.4 
 85 ±1 
 R5.0 
 105.0 
+
-
0.5
0.0 
C
SECTION A-A
B
C
D
GROOVE THICKNESS 
MUST BE +3
 R30.0 
 R55.0 
DETAIL B
SCALE 2 : 1
D1
D2
D3
D4
ALL 6 "PIZZA SLICES" 
THROUGH ALL THE WAY
 
33.9 
 28.9 
 90° 
 23.88 
+
 
0.02
0.00 (H7) 
DETAIL C
SCALE 2 : 1
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
E9, F10 A Milled holes added. 18/05/2021 Yes
C10 B Addition of the external flange 17/08/2021 Yes
C10 C
External flange added in rev B is changed to a shoulder 
with an outer diameter 5mm smaller than the 
blukhead's.
23/08/2021 Yes
B10 D Shoulder added in rev C is replaced to a flange similar 
to rev B, but longer. 24/08/2021
TAG X LOC Y LOC SIZE
A1 -67.5 18.54 10.0 5.0
A2 17.7 -67.73 10.0 5.0
A3 17.7 67.73 10.0 5.0
A4 49.8 -49.19 10.0 5.0
A5 49.8 49.19 10.0 5.0
A6 -67.5 -18.5 10.0 5.0
B1 -60 0 M6x1-H6 THRU
B2 30 -51.96 M6x1-H6 THRU
B3 30 51.96 M6x1-H6 THRU
C1 0 0  9.8 THRU ALL
 20.6  6.4
D1 54.1 10.0 10.0 THRU
D2 44.6 32.1 10.0 THRU
D3 28.3 10.0 10.0 THRU
D4 27.6 11.8 10.0 THRU
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
G G
H H
12
12
11
11
10
10
9
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: 
0.1mm
   ANGULAR: 0.5º
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A2ALUMINUM 6082-T6
WEIGHT: 
ZSOLT CSONKA 31/08/21
D2-111
MOTOR BULKHEAD
D
685.9 g
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
67
 
110.0 
 
60.0 
D1
D2
D4
D3
D5
D6
D7
D8
D9 D10
D11 D12
D13
D14
D15
D16
D17
D18
D19
D20
D22
D21
D23
D24
X
Y
00
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
B Addition of the external flange 17/08/2021 Yes
C
External flange added in rev B is changed to a shoulder 
with an outer diameter 5mm smaller than the 
blukhead's.
23/08/2021 Yes
D Shoulder added in rev C is replaced to a flange similar 
to rev B, but longer. 24/08/2021
TAG X LOC Y LOC SIZE
A6 -67.50 -18.54 10.0 5.0
D1 54.08 10.0 10.0 THRU
D2 44.64 32.12 10.0 THRU
D3 28.28 10.0 10.0 THRU
D4 27.58 11.79 10.0 THRU
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
G G
H H
12
12
11
11
10
10
9
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: 
0.1mm
   ANGULAR: 0.5º
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A2ALUMINUM 6082-T6
WEIGHT: 
ZSOLT CSONKA 24/08/21
D2-111
MOTOR BULKHEAD
D
679.4 g
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
68
 1162.00 
 308.00 
 1.50 
 3.00 
 10.30 
6 M3 Holes 
around 
lower body
3 Fin Slots at 120º, 
around lower body
 156.40 
 152.40 
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES: +-0.125mm
   LINEAR:
   ANGULAR:
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:10 SHEET 1 OF 1
A4Hexcel AS4C 
(3000 Filaments)
WEIGHT: 
BCM
ENDEAVOUR
D2-112
Lower Body
A
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
69
 6.00 TYP 
 8.00 
 36.00  310.00  20.00 
M6x1 6g
15mm MFT TYP
B
1
1 Minimun Full ThreadA
2 3-OFF
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
F3 A
Rod diameter change from 10 to 
8mm diameter
Threard chandes from M8 to M6
Material changed from 6083-T6 to 
Steel 1040
10/05/2021 Yes
D4 B Rod dimension changed to from 200 
to 310 mm 05/07/2021 Yes
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: 
0.1mm
   ANGULAR: 
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:2 SHEET 1 OF 1
A4
WEIGHT: 
jAMIE WHITE
JAMIE WHITE 19/05/21
19/05/21 Rod
B
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
D2-301Steel 1045
399.9 gram
ALEJANDRO VARGAS AVG 10/05/21
X3
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
70
A
A1
B1
B2
A2
C1
A3
BB
B
X
Y
 58.3 TYP 
 142.4 
 120° TYP 
B
B
 R2 TYP 
 R2 TYP 
 7 TYP 
 15° TYP  R62.1 
 R71.7 
DETAIL A
SCALE 2 : 1
ISOMETRIC
IGNORE THESE HOLESI
 10.0 
 10.0 
 8.0 
 
152.40 
- -0.04
0.09
 (f7)  
147.40 
-
-0.04
0.09
 (f7) 
 143.4 
SECTION B-B
TOP PLAN
BOTTOM
A
A
TAG X LOC Y LOC SIZE
A1 -51.96 30 6.5 THRU
A2 0 -60 6.5 THRU
A3 51.96 30 6.5 THRU
B1 -45 -2 29.5 THRU
B2 -23.14 -40.91 29.5 THRU
C1 0 0 10.0 THRU
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
A10, E3 A Outer diameter change from 152.4 to 147.4 mm 15/05/2021 Yes
D9, G11, 
G8 B Holes changed from 8mm to 6.5mm 15/05/2021 Yes
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
G G
H H
12
12
11
11
10
10
9
9
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/- 0.1 
   ANGULAR: +/- 0.5
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A2
WEIGHT: 
JAIME WHITE
ALEJANDRO VARGAS 15/05/21
05/04/21
B
RECOVERY BULKHEAD
JO SHEPTON 05/04/21
D2 - 401ALUMINIUM 6082-T6
418.3 g
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
71
 578.07 
 435.07 
4xR1.25 THRU
 103.00 
 78.20 
R1637.57
 152.40 
 
156.40 
 34.55 
 
38.70 
A A
B B
2
2
1
1
WEIGHT: 
AD2-501 Nose Cone
GFRP
ENDEAVOURBCM
Nose ConePROPRIETARY AND CONFIDENTIAL
THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN 
THIS DRAWING IS THE SOLE 
PROPERTY OF ENDEAVOUR.  ANY 
REPRODUCTION IN PART OR AS A 
WHOLE WITHOUT THE WRITTEN 
PERMISSION OF ENDEAVOUR IS 
PROHIBITED.
COMMENTS:
SHEET 1 OF 1
Q.A.
MFG APPR.
ENG APPR.
CHECKED
DRAWN
DATENAME
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILIMMETERS
TOLERANCES: 0.125MM
FRACTIONAL
ANGULAR: MACH      BEND 
TWO PLACE DECIMAL    
THREE PLACE DECIMAL  
NEXT ASSY USED ON
APPLICATION DO  NOT  SCALE  DRAWING
FINISH
MATERIAL
REV.
A
DWG.  NO.SIZE
SCALE:1:5
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
72
 M10x1.5-6g 
 30° 
 20.00 
 39.77 
 15.5 MFT 
 (92.2) 
 72.22 
 (74.22) 
SECTION A-A
2x45º
A
ISOMETRIC
1
1 MINIMUN FULL THREAD
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
D7 A 2x45º internal flange added 18/05/2021 Yes
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR: +/-0.1
   ANGULAR:+/-0.5°
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:3:2 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3ALUMINIUM 6082-T6
WEIGHT: 
JAMIE WHITE 19/05/21
22/04/21
D2-504
Metal Tip
A
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
ALEJANDRO VARGAS
ZSOLT CSONKA
09/05/21
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
73
 5 
 2 
FRONT
 66.00 
 62.00 
-
-
0.05
0.10 
 15 TYP  15 TYP 
 17.00 TYP  17.50 TYP 
TOP
3.1mm THRU
 6.3 X 90° 
TYP 6 PLCS
BOTTOMA A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3Alumininium 6063
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-608
PLD_Bottom_Plate
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
74
 10 
FRONT
4.1 mm
 6.30 X 90°
TYP 4 PLCS
 5 TYP 
 5 TYP 
 93 TYP 
 49 
 49 
 93 TYP 
 98 
 98 
BOTTOM
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 2
A3Steel
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-614
PLD_Cube_Bottom_Plate
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
75
 10 
FRONT
4.1 mm
 6.30 X 90°
TYP 4 PLCS
 5 TYP 
 5 TYP 
 93 TYP 
 49 
 49 
 93 TYP 
 98 
 98 
 80.00 
 25 
BOTTOM
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 2
A3Steel
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-614
PLD_Cube_Bottom_Plate
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
76
 3 
4.1mm THRU
 6.3 X 90° 
TYP 4 PLCS
2.05mm THRU
 4.4 X 90° 
TYP 12 PLCS
 R5 TYP 
 98.00 
 98.00 
 80.00 
 19.00 TYP 
 44.00 TYP 
 45.00TYP  44.00 TYP 
FRONT
Side
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3Steel
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-615
PLD_Halo
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
77
 87 
 10 
 20.00 
 70.00 
FRONT
TAP M3 THRU TYPTAP M3 THRU TYP
 30 
 63 
 5 TYP 
A
A
DRILL 10mm
TAP M4
 5 
 5 
TOP
DRILL 10mm
TAP M4 5 
 5 
BOTTOM
SIDE
4 - OFF1
REVISIONS
ZONE REV. DESCRIPTION DATE APPROVED
D6, E6 A M3 added 19/05/2021 Yes
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 0.5 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3Steel
WEIGHT: 
Alberto Progida
Alberto Progida
ALEJANDRO VARGAS 15.05
29.04
29.04
D2-616
A
PLD_Rail
A.P.
B
A.P.
A.V.G.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
78
 12.5 TYP 
 27.5 TYP 
 42.5 TYP 
 11.36  
 55 
 3.1mm THRU
TYP 18 PLCS
 158.07 
 165.42 TYP 
 30.00 
 10.00 
 20.00 
 35.00 
 R11.00 TYP 
 25.71 
 38.71 
 44.71 
 57.71 
 63.71 
 109.71 
 115.71 
 147.71 
 7.36 
UP  90°  R 2 
UP  90°  R 2 
Bend Line
Bend Line
R 3mm3mm
R 5mm5mm
A
 2 
 165.42 
SIDEFRONT
Note: see Sheet  2 for further hole details on FRONT view
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 2
A3Alumininium 6063
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-607a
PLD_RASPix_Plate
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
79
 5 
 3 
3.1mm THRU
 6 X 90° 
TYP 6 PLCS
 4.1mm THRU
 66 
  62.00 
-
-
0.05
0.10 
  15 TYP   15 TYP 
  17 TYP    17.50 TYP 
Bottom
Top
Front
Isometric
A A
B B
C C
D D
E E
F F
8
8
7
7
6
6
5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
DRAWN
CHK'D
APPV'D
MFG
Q.A
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED:
DIMENSIONS ARE IN MILLIMETERS
SURFACE FINISH:
TOLERANCES:
   LINEAR:    +/- 0.1mm
   ANGULAR: +/- 1 deg
FINISH: DEBURR AND 
BREAK SHARP 
EDGES
NAME SIGNATURE DATE
MATERIAL:
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING REVISION
TITLE:
DWG NO.
SCALE:1:1 SHEET 1 OF 1
A3Polycarbonate
WEIGHT: 
Calum Arnott
Alberto Progida
14.04
15.04
D2-608b
PLD_Upper_Plate
C.A.
A.P.
SOLIDWORKS Educational Product. For Instructional Use Only.
80
G. Subsystem Details
G.1 Payload Mass Budget
Figure G.1: CANSat Section Mass
81
Figure G.2: CUBESat Section Mass
82
H. Detailed Structural and Mechanical Calcula-
tion
During the calculation of the expected loading on the rocket’s airframe, described in Section 2.3.3
Darwin II was split into a number of body elements, along the length of which the axial and shear
forces, and bending moments were to be calculated. Table H.1 provides more detail on the exact
values used in the calculation of these forces, whereCD is drag coeﬃcient andCN is normal force
coeﬃcient.
Table H.1: Structural system data of Darwin II.
Parameter Body station Value Units
Nose cone
Length 0.55 m
Mass 1.05 kg
CD 0.03 -
CN 0.08 -
Recovery bay
Length 0.38 m
Mass 7.4 kg
CD 0.05 -
CN 0.02 -
Electronics bay
Length 0.31 m
Mass 4.2 kg
CD 0.03 -
CN 0.01 -
Lower body
Length 0.81 m
Mass 12.4 kg
CD 0.16 -
CN 0.21 -
Lower body + ﬁns
Length 0.63 m
Mass 7.5 kg
CD 0.07 -
CN 0.09 -
83
I. Detailed Software Architecture
PreArming State
Teensy powered on
(physically)
Attempt Bluetooth
Connection to GROUND
NOConnection
Established
Await init Signal
NO
YES
init Signal
Received
Initialisation Sequence
Testing Sequence
Sound Buzzer Pattern #1
+ LED Pattern #1
Sound Buzzer Pattern #2
+ LED Pattern #2
YES
Sound Buzzer Pattern #3
+ LED Pattern #3
Sound Buzzer Pattern #4
+ LED Pattern #4
Boosting State
Armed State
Armed State
Coasting State
Boosting State Coasting State DrogueDeployed State
Landed State
MainDeployed State
Collect measurements
YES
NO
acceleration > a0
Start mainTimer (t=0 sec)
Log initial measurements
Collect measurements
Start boostingTimer (sec)
Set measurementCount = 0
Collect measurements
Filter measurements 
(Kalman Filter)
Log measurement buffer to
SD card (every Tlog
timesteps)
Add filtered measurements 
to buffer
measurementCount += 1
YES
NO
NO
Is acceleration
constant?
NO NO
NO
YES
measurementCount % 
Tlog == 0
YES
NO
boostingTimer >
boostingTMax
CONSTANTS
Tlog = .. (timesteps)
boostingTMax = .. (s)
coastingTMax = .. (s)
drogueTMax = .. (s)
a0 = .. (m/s^2)
mainAlt = 457 (m)
vf = .. (m/s)
Start coastingTimer (sec)
Collect measurements
Filter measurements 
(Kalman Filter)
Add filtered measurements 
to buffer
measurementCount += 1
 
NO
Are 2 of the following satisfied:
- velocity increases
- altitude drops
- pressure drops
DrogueDeployed State
coastingTimer >
coastingTMax
Log measurement buffer to
SD card (every Tlog
timesteps)
YES
NO measurementCount % 
Tlog == 0
Log Apogee Time
& decision criterion
YES
Start drogueTimer (sec)
Collect measurements
Filter measurements 
(maybe?)
Add filtered measurements 
to buffer
measurementCount += 1
NO
YESaltitude <=
mainAlt
Send deployMain signal
Log Main deploy time 
& decision criterion
MainDeployed State
YESdrogueTimer >
drogueTMax
Log measurement buffer to
SD card (every Tlog
timesteps)
YES
NO
NO
measurementCount % 
Tlog == 0
Start mainTimer (sec)
Collect measurements
Filter measurements 
(maybe?)
Add filtered measurements 
to buffer
measurementCount += 1
YES
NO
velocity <= vf
&
altitude == constant
&
pressure == constant
Log Landing time
Log measurement buffer to
SD card (every Tlog
timesteps)
YES
measurementCount % 
Tlog == 0
Solve MPC problem
Send airbrakes actuating
signal
Retract airbrakes
Send co2ChargeOff signal
(nose cone separates,
payload & drogue pulled out)
Figure I.1: Software logic for SRAD FC.
84
Boolean
BooleanTeensy
Accelerometer (14 bit) + 
Magentometer (16 bit) + 
Gyroscope (16 bit)
IMU
(I2C / SPI)
Tranceriver
Drogue chute
Main chute
Airbrakes
Logger (SD card)
Ground Control
Pressure (24 bit) + Temperature (24 bit)Pressure sensor
(I2C / SPI)
GPS
Figure I.2: DATA Flow Teensy
85
J. Detailed Electrical Architecture
J.1 Overview
The Darwin II FC is composed of three PCBs purposely designed with modularity and easy integration
in mind. The three boards and the COTS FC are powered in parallel from the 7.4V LiPo battery
power supply, which is stepped down primarily to 5V and 3.3V for its components. The COTS ﬂight
computer is completely isolated from the SRAD ﬂight computer, and conncects in parallel with the
outputs.
The following diagram demonstrates the connections between each of the PCB’s:
Figure J.1: PCB Integration
Processing:
Our FC is controlled by a PJRC Teensy 4.0 micro-controller situated on our 2nd PCB, the controller
board (see Figure J.3). It operates on an ARM Cortex-M7 running at a maximum clock speed of
600MHz.
It contains 40 digital I/O pins, 31 of which can produce Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) outputs.
These pins are are used to facilitate data ﬂow and system control in the FC. These functions include,
but are not necessarily limited to:
• Reading from our sensor modules
• Performing calculations on the data read from the sensors
• Igniting the e-matches to initiate the recovery sequence
• Rotating the servo motor to control the airbrakes system
• Transmitting the data through the transceiver module to the ground station
• Activating the camera system
86
• Log ﬂight data to the on-board SD card
Communication:
Inordertorelayﬂightdatafromthevehicletothegroundstation, ourFCutilisesanAdarfuitRFM96W
LoRa Radio transceiver breakout situated on our telemetry board (see Figure J.4). It operates at a
frequency of 434MHz, with a maximum power output of 100mW. It can achieve a range of up to 20km
with the appropriate antenna and clear line-of-sight.
Our ground station utilises the same transceiver module, connected to an Arduino Uno.
For transmitting down to ground, we will be using an omni-directional antenna to maximise the
transmission area. The ground station will have two antennas, the same omni-directional antenna as
the FC, and a uni-directional YAGI antenna. These will be used at diﬀerent stages of the rockets
ﬂight:
• From launch and until we deploy the main chute, we will use the YAGI uni-directional antenna
as we can guarantee clear line-of-sight. It requires us to aim it straight at the rocket in order to
maintain a strong connection.
• When the main chute has has deployed and the vehicle’s descent slows, its path could vary
signiﬁcantly. As a result, keeping track of the rockets location will prove more diﬃcult, hence
switching to the omni-directional antenna. This means we will have an increased chance of
receiving transmissions from the vehicle and this will aid in recovering it.
Measurements:
One of our FC’s primary objectives is to obtain data from various sensors throughout its ﬂight. This
data is relayed to ground through the communication system described above, as well as stored on a
dedicated SD card.
The following sensor modules are present on our FC, situated on the controller board (see Figure
J.3):
• Sparkfun LSM9DS1 IMU breakout: contains an accelerometer, magnetometer, and gyroscope,
to provide 9 degrees of freedom (DoF), measuring acceleration, angular velocity, and heading.
• Parallax MS5607 Altimeter Module: contains a barometric pressure and temperature sensor to
measure altitude and temperature.
• Adafruit Ultimate GPS breakout: a GPS transceiver module that provides accurate geographical
positioning outputs
87
(a) PCB 1 Layout.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
D D
C C
B B
A A
Title
Number RevisionSize
A4
Date: 7/05/2021 Sheet   of
File: C:\Users\..\PCB_1.SchDoc Drawn By:
COTS_FC
EasyMini COTS_FC
IN1
2
OUT 3
GND
V_Reg
L7805CV
3V3[1]1
GPIO2/SDA3
GPIO3/SCL5
GPIO4/GPCKL07
GND[1]9
GPIO17/GEN011
GPIO27/GEN213
GPIO22/GEN315
3V3[2]17
GPIO10/MOSI19
GPIO9/MISO21
GPIO11/SCLK23
GND[2]25
ID_SD27
GPIO529
GPIO631
GPIO1333
GPIO1935
GPIO2637
GND[3]39
5V[1] 2
5V[2] 4
GND[8] 6
TXD0/GPIO148
RXD0/GPIO1510
GPIO18 12
GND[4] 14
GEN4/GPIO2316
GEN5/GPIO2418
GND[5] 20
GEN/6GPIO2522
CE0!/GPIO824
CE1/!GPIO726
ID_SC 28
GND[6] 30
GPIO12 32
GND[7] 34
GPIO16 36
GPIO20 38
GPIO21 40
RaspberryPi1
ADA3708
3V3[1]1
GPIO2/SDA3
GPIO3/SCL5
GPIO4/GPCKL07
GND[1]9
GPIO17/GEN011
GPIO27/GEN213
GPIO22/GEN315
3V3[2]17
GPIO10/MOSI19
GPIO9/MISO21
GPIO11/SCLK23
GND[2]25
ID_SD27
GPIO529
GPIO631
GPIO1333
GPIO1935
GPIO2637
GND[3]39
5V[1] 2
5V[2] 4
GND[8] 6
TXD0/GPIO148
RXD0/GPIO1510
GPIO18 12
GND[4] 14
GEN4/GPIO2316
GEN5/GPIO2418
GND[5] 20
GEN/6GPIO2522
CE0!/GPIO824
CE1/!GPIO726
ID_SC 28
GND[6] 30
GPIO12 32
GND[7] 34
GPIO16 36
GPIO20 38
GPIO21 40
RaspberryPi2
ADA3708
Main +1
Apogee +2
En_Cam3
OSC_2
OSC_2
R_pulldown
10k
1 2
C_in
33uF
1 2
C_out
100nF
V_bat 1
GND 2
PCB1 Supply
OSC_3
Main- 1
Apogee- 2
FCGND
TL
M4
TR
M4
BL
M4
BR
M4
(b) PCB 1 schematic.
Figure J.2: PCB 1 - COTS FC and camera module board.
88
(a) PCB 2 Layout.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
D D
C C
B B
A A
Title
Number RevisionSize
A4
Date: 8/29/2021 Sheet   of
File: C:\Users\..\PCB_2.SchDoc Drawn By:
SPI clock
GND
CS-Baro3
CS-Baro2
SPI clockGND
RXD
TXD
SPI clockGNDCS-AG_IMU2CS-AG_IMU1CS-M_IMU2CS-M_IMU1CS-SD
SPI clock
SDA/MOSI/SDI
3.3V
CS-Trans
GND1
VDD2
SDA3
SCL4
SDO-AG 13SDO-M 12CS-AG 11CS-M 10RDY 9INT-M 8INT-1 7INT-2 6DEN 5
IMU_1
LSM9DS1
GND1
VDD2
SDA3
SCL4
SDO-AG 13SDO-M 12CS-AG 11CS-M 10RDY 9INT-M 8INT-1 7INT-2 6DEN 5
IMU_2
LSM9DS1
GND1
VDD2
SDA3
SCL4
SDO-AG 13SDO-M 12CS-AG 11CS-M 10RDY 9INT-M 8INT-1 7INT-2 6DEN 5
IMU_3
LSM9DS1
G1 G10 01 12 23 34 45 56 67 78 89 910 1011 1112 12
VBA T VBA T3.3V_1 3.3V_1G2 G2
VINVIN G3G3 3.3V_23.3V_2 2323 2222 2121 2020 1919 1818 1717 1616 1515 1414 1313
ON/OFFON-OFF PROGRAMPGM
TEENSY
TEENSY
1
2
3
Switch_Buzzer
2N3904
1
2
3TranMain
2N3904
Term A 1Term B 2
PMain
Terminal
IN 1
GND 2
OUT 3
5V
L7805CV
VIN3
GND1
VOUT2
3.3V
LD1117V33
ApogeeD1
1N4007
Term A1Term B2
PDrogue
Terminal
IndicatorLED
304090041
CS-Baro1
GND1 VIN2 PS3 SCL4 SDA/SDI5 SDO6 CS7
Altimeter_1
MS5607
GND1 VIN2 PS3 SCL4 SDA/SDI5 SDO6 CS7
Altimeter_2
MS5607
GND1 VIN2 PS3 SCL4 SDA/SDI5 SDO6 CS7
Altimeter_3
MS5607
+
-
Buzzer
CST-951AP
1
2
3
TranDrogue
2N3904
MainD2
1N4007
VIN 1GND 2SIG 3
ServoOut
ServoOut
V_bat1GND2
Power
OSC_3
Main +1 Apogee +2 En_Cam3
OSC_2
OSC_2
MOSI1
MISO2
SCK3
OSC_3A
OSC_3A
VIN1 3V2 GND3 CLK4 D05 DI6 CS7 CD8
SDreader
SDreaderada
IMU3_CS
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDA
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDO
SDA
1 2
C_out3V
10uF
1 2
C_in3V
100nF
R_IMUPullUp1
10k
R_ALTPullUp3
10k
R_ALTPullUp2
10k
R_ALTPullUp1
10k
R_IMUPullUp2
10kR_IMUPullUp3
10k
1 2
Cout5V
100nF
1 2
Cin5V
33uF
RDrogueBase
1k
R1_PMain
1k
RBuzTrans
1k
RDrogueCollector
100
R2_PMain
100
RLED
150
V_bat 1
GND 2
PCB1 Supply
OSC_3
V_bat1 GND2
PCB3 Supply
OSC_3
CS_TRAN1 ICSP_DA TA2
OSC_3B
OSC_3B
G01 RST2
OSC_3C
OSC_3C
112233
Switch
TL
M3
TR
M3
Mid
M3
BR
M3
BL
M3
(b) PCB 2 schematic.
Figure J.3: PCB 2 - SRAD FC board with sensors, indicators, and outputs.
89
(a) PCB 3 Layout.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
D D
C C
B B
A A
Title
Number RevisionSize
A4
Date: 8/29/2021 Sheet   of
File: C:\Users\..\PCB_3.SchDoc Drawn By:
RST9 CS8 MOSI7 MISO6 SCK5 G04 EN3 GND2 VIN1 G1 10
G2 11
G3 12
G4 13
G5 14
Transceiver
RFM96W
N/C8Battery+7Battery-6
ICSP_DCLK1
ICSP_DA TA2
GROUND3
3.3V4
MCLR5
GPS?
bigRedBee
1
VOUT 2VIN3
GND
V-regulator
LD1117V33
MOSI 1MISO 2SCK 3
OSC_3A
OSC_3A
IN1GND2OUT3
5V
L7805CV
12
C_out
10uF
12
C_in
100nF
CS_TRAN 1
ICSP_DA TA2
OSC_3B
OSC_3B
G0 1
RST 2
OSC_3C
OSC_3C
V_bat 1
GND 2
PCB3_Supply
OSC_3
Camera
Rasberry-pi camera
*
Antenna Support
TR
M3
MID_R
M3MID
M3BL
M3
BR
M3
(b) PCB 3 schematic.
Figure J.4: PCB 3 - Telemetry Board.
90
(a) EMC Layout.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
D D
C C
B B
A A
Title
Number RevisionSize
A
Date: 9/05/2021 Sheet   of
File: C:\Users\..\EMCschemv2.0.SchDoc Drawn By:
SDI/SDA
SCK/SCL
Pressure Sensor
2
1
3
4
5
6
P8
MicroSD Card Reader
1
23
Q1
IRF840
2
1
3
P2
UV Sensor
+5V
GND
MOSI
SS
SCK
MISO
2
1
Battery
1
23
Q2
MOSFET
2 1
D2
2 1
D3
2
1
3
4
P3
DPS310
K 1A2
D1
2
1
3
4
P4
SGP30 VOC/CO2
1
J0
Heater 1
1
J1
Heater 2
C2
10u
C1
100n
1 2
10k
R0
2 1
1k
R2
2 1
1k
R3
Vin1
Vin2
Sig3
GND4
OzoneB
2 1
1k
R4
1 2
150
R5
2
1
3
P1
DHT22
D0/TX 1D1/RX 2RESET_1 3GND_1 4D2 5D3 6D4 7D5 8D6 9D7 10D8 11D9 12D10 13D11 14D12 15
VIN30 GND_229 RESET_228 5V27 A726 A625 A524 A423 A322 A221 A120 A019 AREF18 3V317 D1316
Arduino
A000005
9V
GND
+-LS?
CST-951AP
SDI/SDA
SCK/SCL
5V
GND
GND
5V
5V
Signal
GND
GND
Signal
5V
5V
GND
Signal
2
1
VR1
Voltage Regulator
22 1 1
3 3
S?
Environmental Monitoring Cluster (EMC)
1 C
A. Progida, S.Hassett
(b) EMC schematic.
Figure J.5: Environmental Monitoring Cluster
91
(a) PCB 3 Layout.
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
D D
C C
B B
A A
G1G1
00
11
22
33
44
55
66
77
88
99
1010
1111
1212
VBA TVBA T
3.3V_13.3V_1
G2G2
VIN VIN
G3 G3
3.3V_2 3.3V_2
23 23
22 22
21 21
20 20
19 19
18 18
17 17
16 16
15 15
14 14
13 13
ON/OFF ON-OFF
PROGRAMPGM
Teensy
VIN1
3VO2
GND3
SCK4
SDO5
SDI6
CS7
INT8
MH1 MH1
MH2 MH2
BMP388
VIN 1
GND 2
EN 3
G0 4
SCK 5
MISO 6
MOSI 7
CS 8
RST 9
G510 G411 G312 G213 G114
TransceiverT1
2 1
1k
R1
D1
21
1k
R2
D2
COTS_FC?
EasyMini COTS_FC
9V
3.3V
GND
.     MAIN-.     MAIN+EasyMini.     9V
.     GND
Pteensy
B        .
A        .
E-Match
CD1
100n
CD2
10u
+-Bzz
CST-951AP
2 1
150
R3
22 1 1
3 3
S1
IN1GND2OUT3
VReg
L7805CV
1
2
3Pyro
3.3V1
EN2
VBA T3
FIX4
TX5
RX6
GND7
VIN8
PPS9
GPS
Adafruit GPS - June
(b) PCB 3 schematic.
Figure J.6: Recovery Flight Computer
92

--- END CONTENT: EuRoC_technical_report___Darwin_II_compressed.pdf ---
